docs/general/getting-started.md, before:

---
id: getting-started
title: Getting Started
sidebar_label: Getting Started
description: Get started with Polkadot.
slug: ../getting-started
---

Welcome to the Polkadot Wiki! This central source of truth contains guides for interacting with the
core functionality. Our wiki has three main sections: Learn (for learners), Build (for people that
want to build on Polkadot), and Maintain (for people that want to maintain the network).

## What is Polkadot?

Polkadot enables scalability by allowing specialized blockchains to communicate with each other in a
secure, trust-free environment.

Polkadot is built to connect and secure unique blockchains, whether they be public, permission-less
networks, private consortium chains, or oracles and other Web3 technologies. It enables an internet
where independent blockchains can exchange information under common security guarantees.

Polkadot is a living network with the core pillars of governance and upgradability. The network has
an advanced suite of governance tools and, using the [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)
standard as a "meta-protocol", can autonomously deploy network upgrades. Polkadot adapts to your
growing needs without the risks of network forks.

> If you haven't heard of Governance before, a great place to start is the
> [Governance page](../learn/learn-governance.md)

By connecting these dots, Polkadot serves as a foundational part of a decentralized web, where users
control their data and are not limited by trust bounds within the network.

### What can I do with my DOT?

DOT is the native token of the Polkadot Network. DOT can be used for staking, governance,
acquisition of a parachain slot and several key functions on Polkadot.

- 1 DOT - minimum balance required to have an active account on Polkadot Network. If your account
  balance drops below 1 DOT, your account will be reaped. Learn more about
  [Existential Deposit](../build/build-protocol-info#existential-deposit)

- 5 DOT - minimum contribution required to participate in [crowdloans](../learn/learn-crowdloans)
  for [parachain slot auctions](../learn/learn-auction)

- 20 DOT - you can register an [on-chain identity](../learn/learn-identity).

- 120 DOT - you can nominate validators and earn staking rewards. Learn more on
  [how to stake your DOT](../learn/learn-staking).

### Interact with Polkadot

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-account-generation">
      <img src="/img/polkadot-guide/Account.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Creating an Account</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-balance-transfers">
      <img src="/img/polkadot-guide/Transfer.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Balance Transfers</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-staking">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Stake.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150" />
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Staking</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-parachains">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Parachain.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Parachains</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-bridges">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Bridges.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Bridges</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Voting.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Vote for Councilors</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury#creating-the-proposal">
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Proposal.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Make Proposals</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council#submit-candidacy">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Council.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Council Candidacy</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Treasury.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Treasury</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-identity">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Identity.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Set an Identity</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-proxies">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Proxy.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Proxy Accounts</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/ambassadors">  
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Ambassadors.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Become an Ambassador</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

### Polkadot Gifts

<img align="right" src="/img/polkadot-gift.png" width="210" height="200"/>

Polkadot Gifts provide an easy way to:

- Onboard friends or family who are curious about blockchain but haven’t made the leap yet.
- Share your love of Polkadot and send any amount of DOT.
- Say ‘thank you’ or send someone tokens when you don’t know their address.
- Get friends and family set up to participate in crowdloans.

Learn more about how you can create and send Polkadot Gifts
[here](https://polkadot.network/blog/introducing-polkadot-kusama-gifts/).

## Why Polkadot?

Back in the early 2000's, when the internet was gaining popularity for the first time, the internet
featured read-only, static, basic webpages. The online connected world at the time was only the
beginning of virtual data, identities, and more. The internet during this time was also called the
Web 1.0.

As social media platforms and online businesses began to emerge, the internet transformed into the
Web 2.0. This upgraded internet, which we still use today, features dynamic, interactive webpages,
where users can read and write information plus publish their own for others to see. However, this
version of the web comes with downsides, dealing with data control, privacy issues, and trust. This
is where the Web 3.0 comes into the picture.

The Web 3.0 is taking centralized applications and turning them into decentralized, trust-free
protocols. The goal is to transform the internet into a decentralized web, where users control their
own data and identity in a trust-free environment. The Web 3.0 movement aims to remove
intermediaries and build a trustless infrastructure.

> To learn more of the Web3 movement, check out this video from the
> [Web3 Summit](https://youtu.be/l44z35vabvA)

## How does Polkadot work?

The Polkadot network uses a
[sharded model](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shard_(database_architecture)>) where shards - called
"[parachains](../learn/learn-parachains.md)", allow transactions to be processed in parallel instead
of sequentially. Each parachain in the network has a unique state transition function (STF).
Polkadot has a Relay Chain acting as the main chain of the system. Based on Polkadot's design, as
long as a chain's logic can compile to Wasm and adheres to the Relay Chain API, then it can connect
to the Polkadot network as a parachain.

Parachains construct and propose blocks to validators on the Relay Chain, where the blocks undergo
rigorous [availability and validity](../learn/learn-availability.md) checks before being added to
the finalized chain. As the Relay Chain provides the security guarantees,
[collators](../learn/learn-collator.md) - full nodes of these parachains - don't have any security
responsibilities, and thus do not require a robust incentive system. This is how the entire network
stays up to date with the many transactions that take place.

![polkadot-relay-chain](../assets/polkadot_relay_chain.png)

In order to interact with chains that want to use their own finalization process (e.g. Bitcoin),
Polkadot has [bridge parachains](../learn/learn-bridges.md) that offer two-way compatibility,
meaning that transactions can be made between different parachains.

The [Cross-Consensus Messaging Format (XCM)](../learn/learn-cross-consensus.md) allows parachains to
send messages of any type to each other. The shared security and validation logic of the Relay Chain
provide the environment for trust-free message passing that opens up true interoperability.

> To watch a short, beginner-friendly animation on Polkadot, check out our
> [Polkadot Explainer video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-k0xkooSlA)

## Why should you use Polkadot?

Whether you're a blockchain developer or if you're interested in taking part of
[Polkadot's community](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-ambassador-program/), Polkadot offers a
platform for everyone. This wiki offers a place for builders and maintainers to utilize
[tools](../build/build-tools-index.md) and for brand-new learners to dive into educational material.

# Getting Started

For brand-new learners of Blockchain technology:

- The [Blockchain Fundamentals MOOC course][mooc] is a great introduction to start familiarizing
  yourself with blockchain concepts such as cryptography and networks, and how these play into
  things like decentralization and cryptocurrency.

This is recommended for users with backgrounds of all levels, and the course is free!

## Brand-New Polkadot learners:

- [Polkadot's original white paper][white-paper] is a technical summary around one possible
  direction of implementing the Polkadot network. This paper uses rationale and technical details to
  support why this direction is beneficial. This original white paper also explains how Polkadot's
  core components work together to build this decentralized network.
- [Polkadot's overview paper][overview-paper] is an updated version of the white paper that
  describes the protocol in more technical terms. We would recommend reading this overview paper if
  you are interested in digging more into the protocol itself.
- [Polkadot's light paper][light-paper] is a visual, easy to read, and less technical introduction
  into its blockchain technology. This paper dives into the components of Polkadot but is
  understandable for both a non-technical and technical reader.
- [Polkadot's specification][spec] is a Github repository that holds the latest Polkadot Host
  protocol specification, Polkadot's specification tests of the many components of the network, and
  the Polkadot Runtime specification. This repo holds algorithms and explores how various processes
  function in the Polkadot network. The Polkadot specification takes Polkadot's ideas and concepts
  from the light and the white paper but focuses on the technical specs of the technology.
- [Watching the Technical Explainer Videos][teched videos]: These are great introductory videos that
  explain and demonstrate how to use Polkadot and its [User Interface][ui].
- Reading [What is Polkadot? A Brief Introduction][article] on Medium. There are also other great
  articles to read on [Polkadot's Medium][p medium] or [Web3 Foundation's Medium][w medium].

For brand-new learners of Kusama, Polkadot's canary cousin network: To learn more about how to build
and maintain on the Kusama network, please head over to our [Kusama Guide][kusama guide].

## Resources

- [Polkadot Crowdcast](https://www.crowdcast.io/polkadot) - List of all Crowdcast webinars that the
  Web3 Foundation has done.
- [Polkadot Explorer](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer) - Browser for the Polkadot network;
  can be used for Polkadot, Kusama, or any Substrate-based chain.
- [Polkascan](http://polkascan.io/) \- Real-time multi-chain data for Polkadot Relay Chain and
  Parity Substrate chains.
- [Subscan.io](https://subscan.io) - Explorer for Substrate based chains.
- [Polkadot Overview](https://youtu.be/lIghiCmHz0U) - Dr. Gavin Wood presents an overview of
  Polkadot. (Video)
- [Polkadot Overview](https://techcrunch.com/video/fireside-chat-with-jutta-steiner-parity-technologies/) -
  Dr. Jutta Steiner presents Polkadot. (Video)
- [Polkadot & Substrate Overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IoUZdDi5Is&feature=youtu.be) -
  Dr. Gavin Wood presents Substrate (blockchain in-a-box + VM) and Polkadot, and builds a blockchain
  on-stage in 30 minutes using Substrate. (Video)
- [Community / Ecosystem](community.md) - List of community rooms and channels to talk to others
  about Polkadot.
- [Sample Applications](#) - Sample applications that are built on or currently being built for
  Polkadot.
- [Contributing Guide](contributing.md) - Rules for contributing to the wiki.
- [Polkadot Knowledge Base](https://support.polkadot.network/) - Troubleshooting resources for
  specific errors and problems.

[mooc]: https://mooc.web3.foundation/course/blockchain-fundamentals/
[white-paper]: https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf
[overview-paper]: https://github.com/w3f/research/blob/master/docs/papers/OverviewPaper-V1.pdf
[light-paper]: https://polkadot.network/Polkadot-lightpaper.pdf
[spec]: https://github.com/w3f/polkadot-spec
[teched videos]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8
[article]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network/what-is-polkadot-a-brief-introduction-ca3eac9ddca5
[p medium]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network
[w medium]: https://medium.com/web3foundation
[ui]: https://polkadot.js.org/apps/
[account generation]: ../learn/learn-account-generation.md
[transfer]: ../learn/learn-balance-transfers.md
[nominator]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-polkadot.md
[validator]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-validate-polkadot.md
[identity]: ../learn/learn-identity.md
[proxy]: ../learn/learn-proxies.md
[democracy]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md
[council]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council.md
[council voting]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor.md
[treasury]: ../learn/learn-treasury.md
[kusama guide]: https://guide.kusama.network/

Commit message:

DOT - Treasury, Democracy and 1KV
Additional details on DOT utility

docs/general/getting-started.md, after:

---
id: getting-started
title: Getting Started
sidebar_label: Getting Started
description: Get started with Polkadot.
slug: ../getting-started
---

Welcome to the Polkadot Wiki! This central source of truth contains guides for interacting with the
core functionality. Our wiki has three main sections: Learn (for learners), Build (for people that
want to build on Polkadot), and Maintain (for people that want to maintain the network).

## What is Polkadot?

Polkadot enables scalability by allowing specialized blockchains to communicate with each other in a
secure, trust-free environment.

Polkadot is built to connect and secure unique blockchains, whether they be public, permission-less
networks, private consortium chains, or oracles and other Web3 technologies. It enables an internet
where independent blockchains can exchange information under common security guarantees.

Polkadot is a living network with the core pillars of governance and upgradability. The network has
an advanced suite of governance tools and, using the [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)
standard as a "meta-protocol", can autonomously deploy network upgrades. Polkadot adapts to your
growing needs without the risks of network forks.

> If you haven't heard of Governance before, a great place to start is the
> [Governance page](../learn/learn-governance.md)

By connecting these dots, Polkadot serves as a foundational part of a decentralized web, where users
control their data and are not limited by trust bounds within the network.

### What can I do with my DOT?

DOT is the native token of the Polkadot Network. DOT can be used for transaction fees, staking, 
governance, acquisition of a parachain slot and for enabling several key functionalities on Polkadot.

- 1 DOT - minimum balance required to have an active account on Polkadot Network. If your account
  balance drops below 1 DOT, your account will be reaped. Learn more about
  [Existential Deposit](../build/build-protocol-info#existential-deposit)

- 5 DOT - minimum contribution required to participate in [crowdloans](../learn/learn-crowdloans)
  for [parachain slot auctions](../learn/learn-auction)

- 20 DOT - you can register an [on-chain identity](../learn/learn-identity) or vote for 
  [council](../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor)

- 120 DOT - you can nominate validators and earn staking rewards. Learn more on
  [how to stake your DOT](../learn/learn-staking).
  
DOT has a lot of utility in [Polkadot's democracy](../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy). Bonding 
DOT is a requirement to create proposals, to second them and to vote on them when they become 
referendums. Bonding 100 DOT or 5% of requested funding is a requirement to make a 
[treasury proposal](../learn/learn-treasury#creating-a-treasury-proposal). DOT can also enable you 
to participate in programs like [Thousand Validators Program](../thousand-validators#polkadot).

### Interact with Polkadot

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-account-generation">
      <img src="/img/polkadot-guide/Account.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Creating an Account</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-balance-transfers">
      <img src="/img/polkadot-guide/Transfer.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Balance Transfers</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-staking">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Stake.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150" />
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Staking</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-parachains">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Parachain.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Parachains</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-bridges">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Bridges.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Bridges</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Voting.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Vote for Councilors</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury#creating-the-proposal">
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Proposal.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Make Proposals</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council#submit-candidacy">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Council.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Council Candidacy</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Treasury.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Treasury</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-identity">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Identity.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Set an Identity</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-proxies">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Proxy.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Proxy Accounts</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/ambassadors">  
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/polkadot-guide/Ambassadors.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Become an Ambassador</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

### Polkadot Gifts

<img align="right" src="/img/polkadot-gift.png" width="210" height="200"/>

Polkadot Gifts provide an easy way to:

- Onboard friends or family who are curious about blockchain but haven’t made the leap yet.
- Share your love of Polkadot and send any amount of DOT.
- Say ‘thank you’ or send someone tokens when you don’t know their address.
- Get friends and family set up to participate in crowdloans.

Learn more about how you can create and send Polkadot Gifts
[here](https://polkadot.network/blog/introducing-polkadot-kusama-gifts/).

## Why Polkadot?

Back in the early 2000's, when the internet was gaining popularity for the first time, the internet
featured read-only, static, basic webpages. The online connected world at the time was only the
beginning of virtual data, identities, and more. The internet during this time was also called the
Web 1.0.

As social media platforms and online businesses began to emerge, the internet transformed into the
Web 2.0. This upgraded internet, which we still use today, features dynamic, interactive webpages,
where users can read and write information plus publish their own for others to see. However, this
version of the web comes with downsides, dealing with data control, privacy issues, and trust. This
is where the Web 3.0 comes into the picture.

The Web 3.0 is taking centralized applications and turning them into decentralized, trust-free
protocols. The goal is to transform the internet into a decentralized web, where users control their
own data and identity in a trust-free environment. The Web 3.0 movement aims to remove
intermediaries and build a trustless infrastructure.

> To learn more of the Web3 movement, check out this video from the
> [Web3 Summit](https://youtu.be/l44z35vabvA)

## How does Polkadot work?

The Polkadot network uses a
[sharded model](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shard_(database_architecture)>) where shards - called
"[parachains](../learn/learn-parachains.md)", allow transactions to be processed in parallel instead
of sequentially. Each parachain in the network has a unique state transition function (STF).
Polkadot has a Relay Chain acting as the main chain of the system. Based on Polkadot's design, as
long as a chain's logic can compile to Wasm and adheres to the Relay Chain API, then it can connect
to the Polkadot network as a parachain.

Parachains construct and propose blocks to validators on the Relay Chain, where the blocks undergo
rigorous [availability and validity](../learn/learn-availability.md) checks before being added to
the finalized chain. As the Relay Chain provides the security guarantees,
[collators](../learn/learn-collator.md) - full nodes of these parachains - don't have any security
responsibilities, and thus do not require a robust incentive system. This is how the entire network
stays up to date with the many transactions that take place.

![polkadot-relay-chain](../assets/polkadot_relay_chain.png)

In order to interact with chains that want to use their own finalization process (e.g. Bitcoin),
Polkadot has [bridge parachains](../learn/learn-bridges.md) that offer two-way compatibility,
meaning that transactions can be made between different parachains.

The [Cross-Consensus Messaging Format (XCM)](../learn/learn-cross-consensus.md) allows parachains to
send messages of any type to each other. The shared security and validation logic of the Relay Chain
provide the environment for trust-free message passing that opens up true interoperability.

> To watch a short, beginner-friendly animation on Polkadot, check out our
> [Polkadot Explainer video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-k0xkooSlA)

## Why should you use Polkadot?

Whether you're a blockchain developer or if you're interested in taking part of
[Polkadot's community](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-ambassador-program/), Polkadot offers a
platform for everyone. This wiki offers a place for builders and maintainers to utilize
[tools](../build/build-tools-index.md) and for brand-new learners to dive into educational material.

# Getting Started

For brand-new learners of Blockchain technology:

- The [Blockchain Fundamentals MOOC course][mooc] is a great introduction to start familiarizing
  yourself with blockchain concepts such as cryptography and networks, and how these play into
  things like decentralization and cryptocurrency.

This is recommended for users with backgrounds of all levels, and the course is free!

## Brand-New Polkadot learners:

- [Polkadot's original white paper][white-paper] is a technical summary around one possible
  direction of implementing the Polkadot network. This paper uses rationale and technical details to
  support why this direction is beneficial. This original white paper also explains how Polkadot's
  core components work together to build this decentralized network.
- [Polkadot's overview paper][overview-paper] is an updated version of the white paper that
  describes the protocol in more technical terms. We would recommend reading this overview paper if
  you are interested in digging more into the protocol itself.
- [Polkadot's light paper][light-paper] is a visual, easy to read, and less technical introduction
  into its blockchain technology. This paper dives into the components of Polkadot but is
  understandable for both a non-technical and technical reader.
- [Polkadot's specification][spec] is a Github repository that holds the latest Polkadot Host
  protocol specification, Polkadot's specification tests of the many components of the network, and
  the Polkadot Runtime specification. This repo holds algorithms and explores how various processes
  function in the Polkadot network. The Polkadot specification takes Polkadot's ideas and concepts
  from the light and the white paper but focuses on the technical specs of the technology.
- [Watching the Technical Explainer Videos][teched videos]: These are great introductory videos that
  explain and demonstrate how to use Polkadot and its [User Interface][ui].
- Reading [What is Polkadot? A Brief Introduction][article] on Medium. There are also other great
  articles to read on [Polkadot's Medium][p medium] or [Web3 Foundation's Medium][w medium].

For brand-new learners of Kusama, Polkadot's canary cousin network: To learn more about how to build
and maintain on the Kusama network, please head over to our [Kusama Guide][kusama guide].

## Resources

- [Polkadot Crowdcast](https://www.crowdcast.io/polkadot) - List of all Crowdcast webinars that the
  Web3 Foundation has done.
- [Polkadot Explorer](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer) - Browser for the Polkadot network;
  can be used for Polkadot, Kusama, or any Substrate-based chain.
- [Polkascan](http://polkascan.io/) \- Real-time multi-chain data for Polkadot Relay Chain and
  Parity Substrate chains.
- [Subscan.io](https://subscan.io) - Explorer for Substrate based chains.
- [Polkadot Overview](https://youtu.be/lIghiCmHz0U) - Dr. Gavin Wood presents an overview of
  Polkadot. (Video)
- [Polkadot Overview](https://techcrunch.com/video/fireside-chat-with-jutta-steiner-parity-technologies/) -
  Dr. Jutta Steiner presents Polkadot. (Video)
- [Polkadot & Substrate Overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0IoUZdDi5Is&feature=youtu.be) -
  Dr. Gavin Wood presents Substrate (blockchain in-a-box + VM) and Polkadot, and builds a blockchain
  on-stage in 30 minutes using Substrate. (Video)
- [Community / Ecosystem](community.md) - List of community rooms and channels to talk to others
  about Polkadot.
- [Sample Applications](#) - Sample applications that are built on or currently being built for
  Polkadot.
- [Contributing Guide](contributing.md) - Rules for contributing to the wiki.
- [Polkadot Knowledge Base](https://support.polkadot.network/) - Troubleshooting resources for
  specific errors and problems.

[mooc]: https://mooc.web3.foundation/course/blockchain-fundamentals/
[white-paper]: https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf
[overview-paper]: https://github.com/w3f/research/blob/master/docs/papers/OverviewPaper-V1.pdf
[light-paper]: https://polkadot.network/Polkadot-lightpaper.pdf
[spec]: https://github.com/w3f/polkadot-spec
[teched videos]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8
[article]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network/what-is-polkadot-a-brief-introduction-ca3eac9ddca5
[p medium]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network
[w medium]: https://medium.com/web3foundation
[ui]: https://polkadot.js.org/apps/
[account generation]: ../learn/learn-account-generation.md
[transfer]: ../learn/learn-balance-transfers.md
[nominator]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-polkadot.md
[validator]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-validate-polkadot.md
[identity]: ../learn/learn-identity.md
[proxy]: ../learn/learn-proxies.md
[democracy]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md
[council]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council.md
[council voting]: ../maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor.md
[treasury]: ../learn/learn-treasury.md
[kusama guide]: https://guide.kusama.network/
