docs/general/grants.md, before:

---
id: grants
title: Web3 Foundation Grants
sidebar_label: Grants
description: Learn about Web3 Foundation's Grant Program and how you can benefit from it.
keywords: [grants program, grants, funding]
slug: ../grants
---

Web3 Foundation offers grants for open source software development and research around Substrate,
Polkadot, and Kusama.

Applications and deliveries are tracked transparently on GitHub and disbursed in BTC, USDT or DAI. However,
you can also apply in private, get paid out in fiat and seek funding above the regular limits ($30,000 for
first-time applications and $100,000 for follow-up ones), if needed.

More information regarding requirements, the application process, deliveries, etc., can be found in the
[Grants Program README](https://github.com/w3f/Open-Grants-Program). For guidance, there is also a list of
[previously accepted applications](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/blob/master/docs/accepted_grant_applications.md)
and a list of [frequently asked questions](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/blob/master/docs/faq.md).

## Alternative Funding Sources

### Polkadot Treasury

The Polkadot Treasury is a pot of on-chain funds collected through transaction fees, slashing,
staking inefficiencies, etc. The funds held in the treasury can be spent on spending proposals. Both
Polkadot and Kusama offer everyone the opportunity to apply for funding via the treasury. See:

- [Treasury Wiki](../learn/learn-treasury.md)
- [Polkadot Treasury Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IZykdp2cyQavcRyZd_dgNj5DcgxgZR6kAqGdcNARu1w)
- [Kusama Treasury Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1p3UQUjph5t8TVaWnTkfrI5mE-BABnM9Xvtuhdlhl6JE)

:::info Kusama Faucet

Due to high demand and spamming issues, the Kusama faucet is no longer in operation. The Web3 Foundation has considered new ways to distribute KSM for people who need KSM to build.

If you are interested in obtaining KSM for building or research, you can apply through the
[Treasury](../learn/learn-treasury.md#creating-a-treasury-proposal) or receive a
[tip](../learn/learn-treasury.md#tipping) for doing something cool in the community. 

:::

### Other Grant Programs

Below is a list of other grant programs in the Polkadot/Substrate ecosystem:

- [Moonbeam Grants Program](https://moonbeam.network/community/grants/)
- [Edgeware Grants and Bounties](https://github.com/edgeware-builders/construction-projects)
- [Crust Grants Program](https://github.com/crustio/Crust-Grants-Program)
- [HydraDX Grants and Bounties](https://docs.hydradx.io/new_deal)
- [Astar (formerly Plasm) Grants Program](https://docs.astar.network/ecosystem/builders-program)

Commit message:

Clean up Grants page and refs (#3596)
* Clean up Grants page and refs

* rephrase description of ref to grants page

* Update docs/general/grants.md

Co-authored-by: Aleixo Sanchez <15819210+alxs@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update grants.md

* Add info note and link to grants repo doc

* remove Darwinia

No active grants program at Darwinia. The previous link https://docs.darwinia.network/developers/dev-bounty#grant-program was taken down and the github link has not been updated for a while

* Update docs/general/grants.md

Co-authored-by: Aleixo Sanchez <15819210+alxs@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update docs/general/grants.md

Co-authored-by: Aleixo Sanchez <15819210+alxs@users.noreply.github.com>

Co-authored-by: Aleixo Sanchez <15819210+alxs@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/general/grants.md, after:

---
id: grants
title: Grants
sidebar_label: Grants
description: Learn about Grant Programs in the Polkadot ecosystem
keywords: [grants program, grants, funding]
slug: ../grants
---

## Web3 Foundation Grants

Web3 Foundation offers grants for open source software development and research around Substrate,
Polkadot, Kusama and ink!. Applications and deliveries are tracked transparently on GitHub. Information 
regarding requirements, the application process, deliveries, etc. can be found in the
[Grants Program README](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program#web3-foundation-grants-program). For guidance, there is also a list of
[previously accepted applications](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/blob/master/docs/accepted_grant_applications.md#accepted-grant-applications-)
and a list of [frequently asked questions](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/blob/master/docs/faq.md).

## Alternative Funding Sources

:::info

Check the 
[alternative funding sources](https://github.com/w3f/Grants-Program/blob/master/README.md#rocket-alternative-funding-sources) 
section on the Web3 Foundation grants repo for comprehensive information.

:::

### Polkadot Treasury

The Polkadot Treasury is a pot of on-chain funds collected through transaction fees, slashing,
staking inefficiencies, etc. The funds held in the treasury can be spent on spending proposals. Both
Polkadot and Kusama offer everyone the opportunity to apply for funding via the treasury. See:

- [Treasury Wiki](../learn/learn-treasury.md)
- [Polkadot Treasury Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IZykdp2cyQavcRyZd_dgNj5DcgxgZR6kAqGdcNARu1w)
- [Kusama Treasury Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1p3UQUjph5t8TVaWnTkfrI5mE-BABnM9Xvtuhdlhl6JE)

:::info Kusama Faucet

Due to high demand and spamming issues, the Kusama faucet is no longer in operation. The Web3 Foundation has considered new ways to distribute KSM for people who need KSM to build.

If you are interested in obtaining KSM for building or research, you can apply through the
[Treasury](../learn/learn-treasury.md#creating-a-treasury-proposal) or receive a
[tip](../learn/learn-treasury.md#tipping) for doing something cool in the community. 

:::

### Other Grant Programs

Below is a list of other grant programs in the Polkadot/Substrate ecosystem.

- [Darwinia Grants Program](https://github.com/darwinia-network/collaboration/blob/master/grant/README.md#grant-program)
- [Moonbeam Grants Program](https://moonbeam.foundation/grants/)
- [Edgeware Grants and Bounties](https://gov.edgewa.re/discussion/1132-edgeware-proposal-process-and-template)
- [Crust Grants Program](https://github.com/crustio/Crust-Grants-Program)
- [HydraDX Grants and Bounties](https://docs.hydradx.io/new_deal/)
- [Astar / Shiden Network Builders Program](https://astar.network/builders-program/)
- [Picasso / Composable Grants Program](https://grants.composable.finance)
- [SubQuery Grants Programme](https://subquery.network/grants)
- [Acala Grants Program](https://acala.network/ecosystem-program)
- [OAK’s Developer Grants](https://oak.tech/community/grants/)
