docs/general/scams.md, before:

---
id: scams
title: How to Protect Yourself from Scams
sidebar_label: How to Protect Yourself from Scams
description: Learn about the essentials in protecting yourself against scams.
slug: ../learn-scams
---

Scams have unfortunately made an impact on our community. It's important to stay alert and protect
yourself and your non-refundable crypto assets from scammers. If you ever feel you are being
scammed, please email [our support team](mailto:support@web3.foundation).

## Essential rules:

1. Never, ever, ever share your seed phrase or account password.
2. Do not trust anyone online. It is trivial for them to lie and change their identities.
3. [If you are scammed](#i-got-scammed---what-can-i-do), there is **likely nothing** that can be
   done to recover your funds. If a scammer gets a hold of your seed phrase, they can transfer all
   of your funds to their account in seconds. It is better to be safe than to risk all of your
   tokens.
4. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. People, especially celebrities, do not give
   away crypto for free. Even if they wanted to, they could just ask for your address as opposed to
   having you send them tokens.
5. Scams are absolutely rife in this space. It is easy and cheap to set a scam up, and hard to shut
   one down. Therefore, the onus is on the user to be as diligent as possible in avoiding them.
6. If you can, try to always verify new information that you see with an official source, such as
   [Polkadot network's official blog](../general/community.md) or
   [Web3 Foundation support](mailto:support@polkadot.network). Often scammers will fake a website or
   a blog post, but if you check it against a secondary source you will reduce the chances of being
   scammed.

   > Important: With crowdloans active on the network, it is very important to know how to safely
   > participate. Fake crowdloan campaigns may present an attractive target for scammers. If you are
   > participating in a network-native crowdloan, **never send your tokens to an address.** Native
   > crowdloan contributions are made with a special transaction using a campaign index, where the
   > contributed assets remain locked until the end of the lease period. Legitimate teams will not
   > ask you to send your assets to an address to participate in a network-native crowdloan.

### Some Common Types of Scams

- Private messages sent to you over Telegram, Twitter, and other social media - admins or employees
  will never contact you.
- "Giveaways" advertising that you "send us some DOT/KSM, we'll send you double back".
- Sites where you need to enter your seed phrase in order to "sync" your account, claim tokens,
  unblock transactions etc.
- Emails asking for DOT/KSM private keys/seeds/etc., posing as a member of any of our teams.
- Scammers will take official videos, add "giveaway" text around it so that it looks like the
  giveaway is supported by Polkadot, Web3 Foundation, Parity, or another well-known entity.
- Many scammers will create nearly perfect imitations of sites - always triple-check the URL.
- People offering to help you stake or get rewards.
- People responding to questions that you asked publicly in a private chat.
- Advertisements pointing to imitations of sites asking you to enter your seed words.

These are just some of the types of scams. Scammers are inventing new ones all the time. In general,
do not trust anyone messaging you that you did not message yourself, and be wary of anyone
attempting to help you or offer you a "deal".

Scammers will often imitate usernames, profile pictures, etc. of well-known members of the
community. Often the differences in these accounts will be very minor, such as `joe_sm1th` or
`jo_smith` instead of `joe_smith`.

Scammers will often make it seem like the "deal" is only available for a limited time. Do not be
tricked by this, it is always better to confirm than to risk losing everything.

### Admins will never contact you directly

If you've received a message from an admin over Telegram, ignore it. Our team members will never
personally message you. Our social media accounts are posted on our website and any new social media
accounts will be announced by our team. We will never offer to sell you DOT at a discount, air-drop
"rewards", or message you privately to help with a problem you posted publicly. Our social media can
be found below:

- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Polkadot)
- [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/polkadot)
- [Discord](https://discord.gg/wGUDt2p)
- [Polkadot YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB7PbjuZLEba_znc7mEGNgw)
- [Polkadot Medium](https://medium.com/polkadot-network)
- [Our Community Page](../general/community.md) also lists more social media accounts that Web3 Foundation,
  Polkadot, and Kusama have.

### Keep your data secure

You should _never_ share your seed phrase, password, private keys, or any other personal data with
anyone. If you are concerned a wallet could be fake, please check out our official list of supported
[wallets](../build/build-wallets.md).

Some simple things that you can do to keep your assets and information secure from hackers:

- Keep your seed phrase only on paper, in a secret and secure location.
- DO NOT keep your seed phrase on any electronic medium, like the cloud, on your computer, on a USB
  drive, etc.
- Never enter your seed or mnemonic phrase directly into a website.
- Your seed phrase is meant as a backup in case you lose access to your wallet. Use it only for that
  purpose and only in wallets you've used before and trust.
- Your passwords should be strong and unique. It is recommended that you use a
  [password manager app](https://www.howtogeek.com/141500/why-you-should-use-a-password-manager-and-how-to-get-started/)
  to create and store your passwords.
- Keep your computer free of malware. Although an antivirus can be of great help, it's not a
  panacea. Safe browsing and downloading is the only way to be sure your computer is clean.
- Avoid installing browser extensions from sources you don't trust explicitly.
- Store your assets in cold storage, like a hardware wallet or
  [Parity Signer](https://www.parity.io/signer/).

### Always check the source

For any potential scam, always be sure to do a background check on the source, i.e, look at any
username, email, YouTube channel name, URL, etc. If something seems fishy, that's because it likely
is. Never enter any personal data if you feel the source could be a scam. Feel free to check with
[support@polkadot.network](mailto:support@web3.foundation).

### Check twice before sending DOT/KSM

A good practice to take into consideration is to verify the address you are sending crypto to. If
you don't know that account, you probably shouldn't be sending your assets there. It's your
responsibility to make sure that you understand where you are sending your funds. Crypto is a
decentralized space and your only recourse if a mistake is made is by appealing to the council (who
usually will not get involved in matters of mistaken transfers - see below).

### Install the Polkadot{.js} extension

The extension uses crowd-sourced [anti-phishing measures](https://polkadot.js.org/phishing/) to
automatically prevent your browser from displaying known phishing or scam sites. They will be
blocked upon loading, helping to prevent you from visiting these sites and thus falling for them.

### Our official sites

You can use the following list of our official domains to make sure that you're visiting an official
site:

- https://polkadot.network
- https://polkadot.io
- https://kusama.network
- https://web3.foundation
- https://parity.io
- https://substrate.io

Of course, many projects building on Polkadot and Kusama that use similar names. If, however, a site
poses as Polkadot, Kusama, Web3 Foundation, or Parity on a domain not listed above, then it's most
likely a scam.

Besides those, there are also `polkadot.js.org` and `dotapps.io` that host our web wallet and other
tools.

## I Got Scammed - What Can I Do?

In the unfortunate case of having fallen for a scam, there is likely nothing anyone can do to help
you restore your funds. Polkadot and Kusama are decentralized platforms and while we do have
governance functionality that could technically allow for funds freezing or refunds, it is
impossible to prove that you are the original owner, or that you did not sell the tokens and are
trying to reclaim them. Additionally, even with addresses that are obviously in possession of a
scammer, governance is a slow-moving process; even under ideal conditions, it would take over 56
days to come into effect. The thief could easily monitor the network for governance proposals that
would affect their ill-gotten gains and move them to a new address before the proposal is enacted.

You could put together a full account of the transactions and chat messages accompanied by
screenshots and explanations, but there are no guarantee stakeholders on the network will help you
restore the funds as it would set a dangerous precedent. In fact, there have been several attempts
on Polkadot in the past and none have been passed. It is safer for the network and for future users
to consider the money lost. Still, your detailed account of the situation might help prevent others
from falling for the same thing so we recommend retracing your steps and talking publicly about
them, if it's not too private.

Commit message:

replace support pg contact info

docs/general/scams.md, after:

---
id: scams
title: How to Protect Yourself from Scams
sidebar_label: How to Protect Yourself from Scams
description: Learn about the essentials in protecting yourself against scams.
slug: ../learn-scams
---

Scams have unfortunately made an impact on our community. It's important to stay alert and protect
yourself and your non-refundable crypto assets from scammers. If you ever feel you are being
scammed, please get in contact via the [Polkadot support page](https://support.polkadot.network).

## Essential rules:

1. Never, ever, ever share your seed phrase or account password.
2. Do not trust anyone online. It is trivial for them to lie and change their identities.
3. [If you are scammed](#i-got-scammed---what-can-i-do), there is **likely nothing** that can be
   done to recover your funds. If a scammer gets a hold of your seed phrase, they can transfer all
   of your funds to their account in seconds. It is better to be safe than to risk all of your
   tokens.
4. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. People, especially celebrities, do not give
   away crypto for free. Even if they wanted to, they could just ask for your address as opposed to
   having you send them tokens.
5. Scams are absolutely rife in this space. It is easy and cheap to set a scam up, and hard to shut
   one down. Therefore, the onus is on the user to be as diligent as possible in avoiding them.
6. If you can, try to always verify new information that you see with an official source, such as
   [Polkadot network's official blog](../general/community.md) or 
   [Polkadot's Official Support](https://support.polkadot.network). 
   Often scammers will fake a website or a blog post, but if you check it against a secondary source 
   you will reduce the chances of being scammed.

   > Important: With crowdloans active on the network, it is very important to know how to safely
   > participate. Fake crowdloan campaigns may present an attractive target for scammers. If you are
   > participating in a network-native crowdloan, **never send your tokens to an address.** Native
   > crowdloan contributions are made with a special transaction using a campaign index, where the
   > contributed assets remain locked until the end of the lease period. Legitimate teams will not
   > ask you to send your assets to an address to participate in a network-native crowdloan.

### Some Common Types of Scams

- Private messages sent to you over Telegram, Twitter, and other social media - admins or employees
  will never contact you.
- "Giveaways" advertising that you "send us some DOT/KSM, we'll send you double back".
- Sites where you need to enter your seed phrase in order to "sync" your account, claim tokens,
  unblock transactions etc.
- Emails asking for DOT/KSM private keys/seeds/etc., posing as a member of any of our teams.
- Scammers will take official videos, add "giveaway" text around it so that it looks like the
  giveaway is supported by Polkadot, Web3 Foundation, Parity, or another well-known entity.
- Many scammers will create nearly perfect imitations of sites - always triple-check the URL.
- People offering to help you stake or get rewards.
- People responding to questions that you asked publicly in a private chat.
- Advertisements pointing to imitations of sites asking you to enter your seed words.

These are just some of the types of scams. Scammers are inventing new ones all the time. In general,
do not trust anyone messaging you that you did not message yourself, and be wary of anyone
attempting to help you or offer you a "deal".

Scammers will often imitate usernames, profile pictures, etc. of well-known members of the
community. Often the differences in these accounts will be very minor, such as `joe_sm1th` or
`jo_smith` instead of `joe_smith`.

Scammers will often make it seem like the "deal" is only available for a limited time. Do not be
tricked by this, it is always better to confirm than to risk losing everything.

### Admins will never contact you directly

If you've received a message from an admin over Telegram, ignore it. Our team members will never
personally message you. Our social media accounts are posted on our website and any new social media
accounts will be announced by our team. We will never offer to sell you DOT at a discount, air-drop
"rewards", or message you privately to help with a problem you posted publicly. Our social media can
be found below:

- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Polkadot)
- [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/polkadot)
- [Discord](https://discord.gg/wGUDt2p)
- [Polkadot YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB7PbjuZLEba_znc7mEGNgw)
- [Polkadot Medium](https://medium.com/polkadot-network)
- [Our Community Page](../general/community.md) also lists more social media accounts that Web3 Foundation,
  Polkadot, and Kusama have.

### Keep your data secure

You should _never_ share your seed phrase, password, private keys, or any other personal data with
anyone. If you are concerned a wallet could be fake, please check out our official list of supported
[wallets](../build/build-wallets.md).

Some simple things that you can do to keep your assets and information secure from hackers:

- Keep your seed phrase only on paper, in a secret and secure location.
- DO NOT keep your seed phrase on any electronic medium, like the cloud, on your computer, on a USB
  drive, etc.
- Never enter your seed or mnemonic phrase directly into a website.
- Your seed phrase is meant as a backup in case you lose access to your wallet. Use it only for that
  purpose and only in wallets you've used before and trust.
- Your passwords should be strong and unique. It is recommended that you use a
  [password manager app](https://www.howtogeek.com/141500/why-you-should-use-a-password-manager-and-how-to-get-started/)
  to create and store your passwords.
- Keep your computer free of malware. Although an antivirus can be of great help, it's not a
  panacea. Safe browsing and downloading is the only way to be sure your computer is clean.
- Avoid installing browser extensions from sources you don't trust explicitly.
- Store your assets in cold storage, like a hardware wallet or
  [Parity Signer](https://www.parity.io/signer/).

### Always check the source

For any potential scam, always be sure to do a background check on the source, i.e, look at any
username, email, YouTube channel name, URL, etc. If something seems fishy, that's because it likely
is. Never enter any personal data if you feel the source could be a scam. Feel free to check with
[Polkadot's official support](https://support.polkadot.network)..

### Check twice before sending DOT/KSM

A good practice to take into consideration is to verify the address you are sending crypto to. If
you don't know that account, you probably shouldn't be sending your assets there. It's your
responsibility to make sure that you understand where you are sending your funds. Crypto is a
decentralized space and your only recourse if a mistake is made is by appealing to the council (who
usually will not get involved in matters of mistaken transfers - see below).

### Install the Polkadot{.js} extension

The extension uses crowd-sourced [anti-phishing measures](https://polkadot.js.org/phishing/) to
automatically prevent your browser from displaying known phishing or scam sites. They will be
blocked upon loading, helping to prevent you from visiting these sites and thus falling for them.

### Our official sites

You can use the following list of our official domains to make sure that you're visiting an official
site:

- https://polkadot.network
- https://polkadot.io
- https://kusama.network
- https://web3.foundation
- https://parity.io
- https://substrate.io

Of course, many projects building on Polkadot and Kusama that use similar names. If, however, a site
poses as Polkadot, Kusama, Web3 Foundation, or Parity on a domain not listed above, then it's most
likely a scam.

Besides those, there are also `polkadot.js.org` and `dotapps.io` that host our web wallet and other
tools.

## I Got Scammed - What Can I Do?

In the unfortunate case of having fallen for a scam, there is likely nothing anyone can do to help
you restore your funds. Polkadot and Kusama are decentralized platforms and while we do have
governance functionality that could technically allow for funds freezing or refunds, it is
impossible to prove that you are the original owner, or that you did not sell the tokens and are
trying to reclaim them. Additionally, even with addresses that are obviously in possession of a
scammer, governance is a slow-moving process; even under ideal conditions, it would take over 56
days to come into effect. The thief could easily monitor the network for governance proposals that
would affect their ill-gotten gains and move them to a new address before the proposal is enacted.

You could put together a full account of the transactions and chat messages accompanied by
screenshots and explanations, but there are no guarantee stakeholders on the network will help you
restore the funds as it would set a dangerous precedent. In fact, there have been several attempts
on Polkadot in the past and none have been passed. It is safer for the network and for future users
to consider the money lost. Still, your detailed account of the situation might help prevent others
from falling for the same thing so we recommend retracing your steps and talking publicly about
them, if it's not too private.
