docs/general/thousand-contributors.md, before:

---
id: doc-thousand-contributors
title: Thousand Contributors Programme
sidebar_label: Thousand Contributors Programme
description: Learn about the Thousand Contributors Programme and how it can support your contributions.
slug: ../thousand-contributors
---

The [Thousand Contributors Programme](https://github.com/w3f/1KC) is an initiative maintained by 
Web3 Foundation's Technical Education and Support team to offer an off-chain contributor program to 
support and reward community contributions. The program focuses on rewarding contributors in the areas 
of technical education, community, and support that relate to the Polkadot and Kusama ecosystems.

## How to Participate

You can signal your intent to participate by: 

1. Choosing a task from this [list](https://github.com/orgs/w3f/projects/13) of open tasks
2. Then fill out this [typeform](https://form.typeform.com/to/I9vjnCcI)

### Process

Once you have submitted your contribution proposal, the team will:

1. Evaluate. Your [evaluators](#1kc-evaluators) will differ depending on which area you want to contribute.
2. Accept or deny. Once we review your proposal, we will get in touch with you about the status.
3. Define your delivery. All tasks will have different delivery requirements; we will communicate what your 
contribution needs to fulfill.
4. Fund. Once both parties finalize the delivery of the task, the team will deposit your rewards to the account
shared with us.

### Submission reviews

The review process follows the present pipeline in the [1KC public GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/w3f/projects/13).

Learn more about the program and its components on the official [1KC repository](https://github.com/w3f/1KC)

Commit message:

Update thousand-contributors.md (#3472)
* Update thousand-contributors.md

Make necessary changes to the doc to reflect the current status of 1KC program

* Update thousand-contributors.md

docs/general/thousand-contributors.md, after:

---
id: doc-thousand-contributors
title: Thousand Contributors Programme
sidebar_label: Thousand Contributors Programme
description: Learn about the Thousand Contributors Programme and how it can support your contributions.
slug: ../thousand-contributors
---

The [Thousand Contributors Programme](https://github.com/w3f/1KC) is an initiative maintained by 
Web3 Foundation's Technical Education and Support team to offer an off-chain contributor program to 
support and reward community contributions. The program focuses on rewarding contributors in the areas 
of technical education, community, and support that relate to the Polkadot and Kusama ecosystems.

:::note The pilot phase of Thousand Contributors Programme has ended

You can still submit your intent to participate. The submissions will be reviewed and accepted on a 
case-by-case basis. 

:::

## How to Participate

You can signal your intent to participate by: 

1. Choosing a task from this [list](https://github.com/orgs/w3f/projects/13) of open tasks
2. Then fill out this [typeform](https://form.typeform.com/to/I9vjnCcI)

### Process

Once you have submitted your contribution proposal, the team will:

1. Evaluate. Your [evaluators](#1kc-evaluators) will differ depending on which area you want to contribute.
2. Accept or deny. Once we review your proposal, we will get in touch with you about the status.
3. Define your delivery. All tasks will have different delivery requirements; we will communicate what your 
contribution needs to fulfill.
4. Fund. Once both parties finalize the delivery of the task, the team will deposit your rewards to the account
shared with us.

### Submission reviews

The review process follows the present pipeline in the [1KC public GitHub project](https://github.com/orgs/w3f/projects/13).

Learn more about the program and its components on the official [1KC repository](https://github.com/w3f/1KC)
