docs/general/kusama/kusama-bug-bounty.md, before:

---
id: kusama-bug-bounty
title: Bug Bounty
sidebar_label: Bug Bounty
description: An overview of how you can help catch bugs.
slug: ../../kusama-bug-bounty
---

We call on our community and all bug bounty hunters to help identify bugs in Kusama.

If you discover a bug, we appreciate your cooperation in responsibly investigating and reporting it
as per [instructions on Web3 Foundation website](https://web3.foundation/security-report/).
Disclosure to any third parties disqualifies bug bounty eligibility.

## Eligibility

Generally speaking, any bug that poses a significant vulnerability, either to the soundness of
protocols and protocol/implementation compliance to network security, to classical client security,
as well as security of cryptographic primitives, could be eligible for a reward. Please note that it's
entirely our discretion to decide whether a bug is significant enough to qualify for a reward.

**Examples include:** An attack that could disrupt the entire network and harm the validity to the
network would be considered a critical threat. An attack that would disrupt service to others
would be regarded as a high threat.

Please note: The submission quality will be a significant factor in the level of considered compensation.
A high-quality submission includes explaining how the bug can be reproduced, how it was
discovered, and otherwise critical details. Please disclose responsibly; disclosure to any third
parties disqualifies bug bounty eligibility.

**Responsible investigation and reporting** Responsible investigation and reporting include, but
isn't limited to, the following:

- Don't violate the privacy of other users, destroy data, etc.
- Don't defraud or harm Kusama network or its users during your research; you should make a good
  faith effort not to interrupt or degrade our services.
- Don't target the validators' physical security measures, or attempt to use social engineering,
  spam, distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks, etc.
- Initially, report the bug only to us and not to anyone else.
- Give us a reasonable amount of time to fix the bug before disclosing it to anyone else, and give
  us adequate written warning before disclosing it to anyone else.
- In general, please investigate and report bugs in a way that makes a reasonable, good-faith effort
  not to be disruptive or harmful to our users or us. Otherwise, your actions might be interpreted
  as an attack rather than an effort to be helpful.

## How to report a bug

Please follow the instructions at
[web3.foundation/security-report/](https://web3.foundation/security-report/).

Commit message:

Add note to bug bounty page to clarify that the program does not cover external bugs

docs/general/kusama/kusama-bug-bounty.md, after:

---
id: kusama-bug-bounty
title: Bug Bounty
sidebar_label: Bug Bounty
description: An overview of how you can help catch bugs.
slug: ../../kusama-bug-bounty
---

> Note: The bug bounty program does *not* cover bugs on code bases that are external to or, written 
> on top of Kusama, or that use Kusama. To be eligable for the bug bounty program the bug has to
> be a part of the Polkadot codebase, this includes protocols that Polkadot uses such as AnV, XCM, 
> GRANDPA, etc.

We call on our community and all bug bounty hunters to help identify bugs in Kusama.

If you discover a bug, we appreciate your cooperation in responsibly investigating and reporting it
as per [instructions on Web3 Foundation website](https://web3.foundation/security-report/).
Disclosure to any third parties disqualifies bug bounty eligibility.

## Eligibility

Generally speaking, any bug that poses a significant vulnerability, either to the soundness of
protocols and protocol/implementation compliance to network security, to classical client security,
as well as security of cryptographic primitives, could be eligible for a reward. Please note that it's
entirely our discretion to decide whether a bug is significant enough to qualify for a reward.

**Examples include:** An attack that could disrupt the entire network and harm the validity to the
network would be considered a critical threat. An attack that would disrupt service to others
would be regarded as a high threat.

Please note: The submission quality will be a significant factor in the level of considered compensation.
A high-quality submission includes explaining how the bug can be reproduced, how it was
discovered, and otherwise critical details. Please disclose responsibly; disclosure to any third
parties disqualifies bug bounty eligibility.

**Responsible investigation and reporting** Responsible investigation and reporting include, but
isn't limited to, the following:

- Don't violate the privacy of other users, destroy data, etc.
- Don't defraud or harm Kusama network or its users during your research; you should make a good
  faith effort not to interrupt or degrade our services.
- Don't target the validators' physical security measures, or attempt to use social engineering,
  spam, distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks, etc.
- Initially, report the bug only to us and not to anyone else.
- Give us a reasonable amount of time to fix the bug before disclosing it to anyone else, and give
  us adequate written warning before disclosing it to anyone else.
- In general, please investigate and report bugs in a way that makes a reasonable, good-faith effort
  not to be disruptive or harmful to our users or us. Otherwise, your actions might be interpreted
  as an attack rather than an effort to be helpful.

## How to report a bug

Please follow the instructions at
[web3.foundation/security-report/](https://web3.foundation/security-report/).
