docs/general/kusama/kusama-getting-started.md, before:

---
id: kusama-getting-started
title: Interact with Kusama
sidebar_label: Home
description: Reference point for Kusama content.
slug: ../../kusama-getting-started
---

### Polkadot's Canary Network

Kusama is a *canary network* for Polkadot; an early release of the code that is available first and
holds real economic value. For developers, Kusama is a proving ground for runtime upgrades, on-chain
governance, and parachains.

**No Promises**.

Kusama is owned by those who hold the Kusama tokens (**KSM**). There's no central kill switch and
all changes are made through the protocol's on-chain governance. Kusama is experimental. The network
is a permissionless and anyone can come along and start using it.
Those who participated in the Polkadot sale can claim a proportional amount of KSM through
the [Kusama Claims process][claims].

> As a KSM holder, you can interact with all the features of the Kusama network such as
> staking (i.e. validating or nominating), governance, parachain auctions, basic transfers and
> everything else.

**Expect Chaos**.

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-account-generation">
      <img src="/img/kusama-guide/Account.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Creating an Account</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-balance-transfers">
      <img src="/img/kusama-guide/Transfer.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Balance Transfers</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-staking">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Stake.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150" />
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Staking</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-parachains">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Parachain.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Parachains</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-bridges">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Bridges.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Bridges</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Voting.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Vote for Councilors</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury#creating-the-proposal">
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Proposal.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Make Proposals</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council#submit-candidacy">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Council.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Council Candidacy</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Treasury.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Treasury</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-identity">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Identity.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Set an Identity</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Nominate.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Become a Nominator</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-proxies">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Proxy.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Proxy Accounts</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-crowdloans/">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Crowdloans.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Participate in Crowdloans</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-society-kusama">  
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Kusama-Society.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Join Kappa Sigma Mu</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/ambassadors">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Ambassadors.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Become an Ambassador</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

For brand-new learners of Kusama's cousin network, Polkadot, please head over to the 
[Polkadot Wiki][].

While Kusama does not support smart contracts natively, building apps on it is still possible
(e.g. [RMRK.app](https://rmrk.app)). If you're interested in diving deeper into *proper* development, 
however, check out the [builders guide][].

[mooc]: https://mooc.web3.foundation/course/blockchain-fundamentals/
[medium]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network/kusama-network-7446706b8f4c
[claims]: kusama-claims.md
[endpoints]: kusama-endpoints.md
[tokens]: https://claim.kusama.network/
[validator]: ../../maintain/kusama/mirror-maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama.md
[nominator]: ../../maintain/kusama/mirror-maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama.md
[polkadot wiki]: https://wiki.polkadot.network/
[builders guide]: ../../build/build-index.md

Commit message:

closes #2722; add Polkadot gifts to getting started pages (#2732)

docs/general/kusama/kusama-getting-started.md, after:

---
id: kusama-getting-started
title: Interact with Kusama
sidebar_label: Home
description: Reference point for Kusama content.
slug: ../../kusama-getting-started
---

### Polkadot's Canary Network

Kusama is a *canary network* for Polkadot; an early release of the code that is available first and
holds real economic value. For developers, Kusama is a proving ground for runtime upgrades, on-chain
governance, and parachains.

**No Promises**.

Kusama is owned by those who hold the Kusama tokens (**KSM**). There's no central kill switch and
all changes are made through the protocol's on-chain governance. Kusama is experimental. The network
is a permissionless and anyone can come along and start using it.
Those who participated in the Polkadot sale can claim a proportional amount of KSM through
the [Kusama Claims process][claims].

> As a KSM holder, you can interact with all the features of the Kusama network such as
> staking (i.e. validating or nominating), governance, parachain auctions, basic transfers and
> everything else.

**Expect Chaos**.

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-account-generation">
      <img src="/img/kusama-guide/Account.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Creating an Account</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-balance-transfers">
      <img src="/img/kusama-guide/Transfer.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
        <div class="cards-body">
            <h5 class="cards-title">Balance Transfers</h5>
        </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-staking">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Stake.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150" />
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Staking</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-parachains">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Parachain.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Parachains</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-bridges">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Bridges.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Bridges</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-vote-councillor">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Voting.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Vote for Councilors</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury#creating-the-proposal">
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Proposal.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Make Proposals</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-join-council#submit-candidacy">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Council.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Council Candidacy</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-treasury">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Treasury.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Treasury</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-identity">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Identity.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Set an Identity</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Nominate.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                 <h5 class="cards-title">Become a Nominator</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-proxies">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Proxy.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Proxy Accounts</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

<tr class="cards-container">
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/learn-crowdloans/">
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Crowdloans.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Participate in Crowdloans</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
  <td>
  <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/maintain-guides-society-kusama">  
    <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Kusama-Society.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
            <div class="cards-body">
                <h5 class="cards-title">Join Kappa Sigma Mu</h5>
            </div>
  </a>
  </td>
  <td>
    <a class="guide-link" href="../docs/ambassadors">  
      <img class="guide-image" src="/img/kusama-guide/Ambassadors.png" alt="Drawing" width="250" height="150"/>
              <div class="cards-body">
                  <h5 class="cards-title">Become an Ambassador</h5>
              </div>
    </a>
  </td>
</tr>

<br />

For brand-new learners of Kusama's cousin network, Polkadot, please head over to the 
[Polkadot Wiki][].

### Kusama Gifts

<img align="right" src="/img/kusama-gift.png" width="210" height="200"/>

Kusama Gifts provide an easy way to:

- Onboard friends or family who are curious about blockchain but haven’t made the leap yet.
- Share your love of Kusama and send any amount of KSM.
- Say ‘thank you’ or send someone tokens when you don’t know their address.
- Get friends and family set up to participate in crowdloans.

Learn more about how you can create and send Kusama Gifts [here](https://polkadot.network/blog/introducing-polkadot-kusama-gifts/).

While Kusama does not support smart contracts natively, building apps on it is still possible
(e.g. [RMRK.app](https://rmrk.app)). If you're interested in diving deeper into *proper* development, 
however, check out the [builders guide][].

[mooc]: https://mooc.web3.foundation/course/blockchain-fundamentals/
[medium]: https://medium.com/polkadot-network/kusama-network-7446706b8f4c
[claims]: kusama-claims.md
[endpoints]: kusama-endpoints.md
[tokens]: https://claim.kusama.network/
[validator]: ../../maintain/kusama/mirror-maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama.md
[nominator]: ../../maintain/kusama/mirror-maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama.md
[polkadot wiki]: https://wiki.polkadot.network/
[builders guide]: ../../build/build-index.md
