docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md, before:

---
id: build-smart-contracts
title: Smart Contracts
sidebar_label: Smart Contracts
description: How smart contracts play their role in the Polkadot ecosystem.
slug: ../build-smart-contracts
---

The {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} Relay Chain will
not natively support smart contracts, however,
parachains on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}  
will support smart contracts.

## Difference between developing a smart contract and a parachain

### Layer of Abstraction

When you write a smart contract, you are creating the instructions that associate with
and deploy on a specific chain address.

In comparison, a runtime module is the entire logic of a chain's state transitions (what's called a
state transition function).

Smart contracts must consciously implement upgradability while parachains will have the ability to
swap out their code entirely through a root command or via the governance pallet.

When you build a smart contract, it will eventually be deployed to a target chain with its own
environment. Parachains allow the developer to declare the environment of their own chain, even
allowing others to write smart contracts for it.

### Gas Fees

Smart contracts must find a way to limit their own execution, or else full nodes are vulnerable to
DOS attacks. An infinite loop in a smart contract, for example, could consume the computational
resources of an entire chain, preventing others from using it. The
[halting problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem) shows that with a powerful enough
language, it is impossible to know ahead of time whether or not a program will ever cease execution.
Some platforms, such as Bitcoin, get around this constraint by providing a very restricted scripting
language. Others, such as Ethereum, "charge" the smart contract "gas" for the rights to execute
their code. If a smart contract does get into a state where execution will never halt, it eventually
runs out of gas, ceases execution, and any state transition that the smart contract would have made is
rolled back. {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} uses a *weight-fee model*
and not a *gas-metering model*.

Parachains can implement arbitrarily powerful programming languages and contain no gas notion for their
own native logic. This means that some functionality is easier to implement for the
developer, but some constructs, such as a loop without a terminating
condition, should *never* be implemented. Leaving certain logic, such as complex loops that
could run indefinitely, to a non-smart contract layer, or even trying to eliminate it, will often be a
wiser choice. Parachains try to be proactive, while smart contract
platforms are event-driven.

## Building a Smart Contract

The Polkadot relay chain itself will not support smart contracts. However, since the parachains that
connect to Polkadot can support arbitrary state transitions, they can support smart contracts.

Substrate presently supports smart contracts out-of-the-box in two ways:

- The EVM pallet offered by [Frontier][].
- The [Contracts pallet][] in the FRAME library for Wasm-based contracts.

### Frontier EVM Contracts

[Frontier][] is the suite of tools that enables a Substrate chain to run Ethereum contacts
(EVM) natively with the same API/RPC interface, Ethereum exposes on Substrate. Ethereum Addresses
can also be mapped directly to and from Substrate's SS58 scheme from existing accounts.

### Substrate Contracts

Substrate offers a built-in
[contract pallet](https://docs.substrate.io/rustdocs/latest/pallet_contracts/index.html);
as time goes on, more parachains will support [WebAssembly](../learn/learn-wasm.md) smart contracts.
Additionally, there is the
[EVM Pallet](https://docs.substrate.io/v3/runtime/smart-contracts/#evm-pallet), which allows
a parachain to implement the Ethereum Virtual Machine, thereby supporting almost direct ports of
Ethereum contracts.

A video version of the recap of the smart contract situation is available
on the [Polkadot YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fKHkFBXaUxQ).

#### Resources

[When should I build a Substrate runtime versus a Substrate smart contract](https://stackoverflow.com/a/56041305)?
This post answers the question more technically of when a developer might choose to develop a
runtime versus a smart contract.

Here is the list of current resources available to developers who want to get started writing smart
contracts to deploy on parachains based on Substrate.

- [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink) - Parity's ink to write smart contracts.
- [Substrate ink! Workshop](https://docs.substrate.io/tutorials/v3/ink-workshop/pt1/) - Walks you
  through the basics of writing and deploying an ERC-20 token using `ink!`.

### Contracts Pallet

The experience of deploying to an EVM-based chain may be more familiar to developers that have
written smart contracts before. However, the Contracts pallet makes some notable improvements to the
design of the EVM:

1. **Wasm**. The Contracts pallet uses WebAssembly as its compilation target. Any language that
   compiles to Wasm can potentially be used to write smart contracts. Nevertheless, it is better to 
   have a dedicated domain-specific language, and for that reason Parity offers the [ink!](#ink) language.

2. **Rent**. Contracts must pay rent or else hold a deposit suitably large enough in order to
   justify its existence on-chain. When a contract does not uphold this, it may create what's called
   a *tombstone* which is a reference to the contract. In some conditions, the contract will be
   deleted outright along with its storage if it does not maintain these requirements.

3. **Caching**. Contracts are cached by default and therefore means they only need to be deployed
   once and afterward be instantiated as many times as you want. This helps to keep the storage load
   on the chain down to the minimum. On top of this, when a contract is no longer being used and the
   *existential deposit* is drained, the code will be erased from storage (known as reaping).

#### Storage Rent: Deprecated

`pallet_contracts` was initially designed to combat unbounded state growth by charging contracts for
the state they consume but has since been deprecated.

See the associated [pull request](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/9669) for more details.

### Ink

[ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink) is a domain specific language for writing smart contracts
in Rust and compiles to Wasm code. As it states in its README, it is still in an experimental phase
so brave developers should be aware that they might have a bumpy - but workable - development
experience. There are some projects that have built projects in ink! with a decent level of
complexity such as Plasm's [Plasma contracts][plasm plasma], so it is mature enough to start
building interesting things.

For interested developers, they can get started writing smart contracts using ink! by studying the
[examples](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/tree/master/examples) that were already written. These
can be used as guideposts to writing more complex logic that will be deployable on smart contract
parachains.

ink! has laid much of the groundwork for a new smart contract stack that is based on a Wasm virtual
machine and compatible with Substrate chains.

#### Examples of Smart Contracts in `ink!`

Collected below are some community examples of smart contracts in `ink!`. **Are you working on a
smart contract example? Ask us to add it to this page!**

- [Ownable](https://github.com/JesseAbram/foRust/): Port of the OpenZeppelin `Ownable` contract.
- [OpenBrush](https://docs.openbrush.io/): an `ink!` library providing standard contracts based on
  [PSP](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) with useful contracts and macros for building.

## Smart Contract Environments are still Maturing

It is still early for smart contracts on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }} 
{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} and the development is only now stabilizing.
We are actively producing content to help developers get up to speed and will maintain the Wiki 
with the latest resources. You should also keep up to date with the following links:

### Parity Tech

- [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink)
- [Substrate contracts pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/frame/contracts)

### Parachains

- [Edgeware][]
- [Moonbeam][]
- [Astar](https://astar.network/)
- [Acala](https://acala.network/)
- [Phala](https://phala.network)

Many smart contract platforms are building to become a parachain in the ecosystem. 
A community created and maintained list of different smart 
contract platforms building on Polkadot can be found at 
[PolkaProjects](https://www.polkaproject.com/#/projects?cateID=1&tagID=6).

#### Edgeware

[Edgeware][edgeware] is a permissionless smart contract platform. It is an option for smart contract 
developers and want to deploy to a live environment. Users can deploy both EVM and WASM smart contracts 
on Edgeware. Edgeware intends to connect to Polkadot and Kusama as a smart contract parachain.

Try deploying a smart contract on Edgeware by following their 
[documentation][edgeware contracts documentation].

#### Moonbeam

[Moonbeam][] is another project that is planning to deploy to Polkadot as a parachain and will
support Ethereum compatible smart contracts. Since Moonbeam uses [Frontier][], an interoperability layer 
with existing Ethereum tooling, it will support all applications that are written to target the EVM 
environment with little friction.

[Moonriver](https://docs.moonbeam.network/networks/moonriver/), a companion network to Moonbeam, launched 
as a parachain on Kusama. Parachain functionality is live, and features are being incrementally released. 
The final phase of the launch will include EVM functionality and balance transfers.

Try deploying a smart contract to Moonbeam by following their [documentation][moonbeam docs].

#### Astar

[Astar](https://astar.network/) (formerly Plasm) is built on Substrate as a smart contract platform and 
intends to integrate with Polkadot as a parachain. [Shiden](https://shiden.astar.network/) is the sister 
network to Astar, is currently live on Kusama, and supports EVM, WASM, and Layer 2 solutions. Astar aims 
to house all layer 2 scaling solutions and support all layer 2 protocols through the 
[OVM](https://docs.astar.network/learn/layer2/optimistic-virtual-machine) (Optimistic Virtual Machine).

Try deploying an Ethereum or ink! smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://docs.astar.network/build/smart-contracts).

#### Acala

[Acala](https://acala.network/) is a decentralized finance consortium and DeFi infrastructure chain 
delivering a set of protocols to serve as the DeFi hub on Polkadot. [Karura](https://acala.network/karura), 
Acala's canary network is live as a parachain on Kusama. Interested teams are now able to deploy DApps and 
smart contracts on Karura's platform. Acala is also implementing the 
[Acala EVM](https://wiki.acala.network/learn/acala-evm/why-acala-evm).

Try deploying an Acala EVM smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://wiki.acala.network/build/development-guide/smart-contracts).

#### Phala

[Phala](https://phala.network) is a privacy-preserving cloud compute platform and aims to provide strong 
guarantees of confidentiality as a cross-chain platform. As a smart contract platform, Phala will enable 
the use of confidential smart contracts on Polkadot. [Khala](https://phala.network/en/khala) is Phala's 
canary network and is live as a parachain on Kusama.

Try deploying a confidential smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://wiki.phala.network/en-us/docs/developer/your-first-confidential-contract/).

## Keep In Touch

Even though the tooling is still maturing, the advantage of being early will be the familiarity and 
head start on your project, allowing you to innovate and create something truly new.

{{ polkadot: If you have interesting ideas for smart contracts on Polkadot, feel free to drop 
into the [Polkadot Watercooler](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org) to talk 
about them. Developers may be interested in joining the
[Polkadot Beginners Lounge](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadotnoobs:matrix.org) or
[Substrate Technical](https://matrix.to/#/#substrate-technical:matrix.org) to ask their questions.
As always, keep up to date with Polkadot and Kusama by following the
[social channels](../general/community.md). :polkadot }}

{{ kusama: If you have interesting ideas for smart contracts on Kusama, feel free to drop into the 
[Kusama Watercooler](https://matrix.to/#/#kusama-watercooler:matrix.org) to talk about them.
Developers may be interested in joining the
[Polkadot Beginners Lounge](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadotnoobs:matrix.org) or
[Substrate Technical](https://matrix.to/#/#substrate-technical:matrix.org) to ask their questions.
As always, keep up to date with Polkadot and Kusama by following the
[social channels](../general/community.md). :kusama }}

All the best.

[frontier]: https://github.com/paritytech/frontier
[contracts pallet]: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/contracts/
[edgeware]: https://edgewa.re
[edgeware documentation]: https://docs.edgewa.re/
[edgeware contracts documentation]: https://main.edgeware.wiki/development/develop/smart-contracts
[plasm plasma]: https://github.com/staketechnologies/Plasm
[moonbeam]: https://moonbeam.network
[moonbeam docs]: https://docs.moonbeam.network/
[frontier]: (https://github.com/paritytech/frontier)

Commit message:

Updated smart contracts page -  with PSPs and Libraries (#2814)
* Updated smart contracts page with PSPs and Libraries

Deleted the Ownable contract example as it was deprecated

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

* Update docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

Co-authored-by: Danny Salman <salman.danny03@hotmail.com>

docs/build/build-smart-contracts.md, after:

---
id: build-smart-contracts
title: Smart Contracts
sidebar_label: Smart Contracts
description: How smart contracts play their role in the Polkadot ecosystem.
slug: ../build-smart-contracts
---

The {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} Relay Chain will
not natively support smart contracts, however,
parachains on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}  
will support smart contracts.

## Difference between developing a smart contract and a parachain

### Layer of Abstraction

When you write a smart contract, you are creating the instructions that associate with
and deploy on a specific chain address.

In comparison, a runtime module is the entire logic of a chain's state transitions (what's called a
state transition function).

Smart contracts must consciously implement upgradability while parachains will have the ability to
swap out their code entirely through a root command or via the governance pallet.

When you build a smart contract, it will eventually be deployed to a target chain with its own
environment. Parachains allow the developer to declare the environment of their own chain, even
allowing others to write smart contracts for it.

### Gas Fees

Smart contracts must find a way to limit their own execution, or else full nodes are vulnerable to
DOS attacks. An infinite loop in a smart contract, for example, could consume the computational
resources of an entire chain, preventing others from using it. The
[halting problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem) shows that with a powerful enough
language, it is impossible to know ahead of time whether or not a program will ever cease execution.
Some platforms, such as Bitcoin, get around this constraint by providing a very restricted scripting
language. Others, such as Ethereum, "charge" the smart contract "gas" for the rights to execute
their code. If a smart contract does get into a state where execution will never halt, it eventually
runs out of gas, ceases execution, and any state transition that the smart contract would have made is
rolled back. {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} uses a *weight-fee model*
and not a *gas-metering model*.

Parachains can implement arbitrarily powerful programming languages and contain no gas notion for their
own native logic. This means that some functionality is easier to implement for the
developer, but some constructs, such as a loop without a terminating
condition, should *never* be implemented. Leaving certain logic, such as complex loops that
could run indefinitely, to a non-smart contract layer, or even trying to eliminate it, will often be a
wiser choice. Parachains try to be proactive, while smart contract
platforms are event-driven.

## Building a Smart Contract

The Polkadot relay chain itself will not support smart contracts. However, since the parachains that
connect to Polkadot can support arbitrary state transitions, they can support smart contracts.

Substrate presently supports smart contracts out-of-the-box in two ways:

- The EVM pallet offered by [Frontier][].
- The [Contracts pallet][] in the FRAME library for Wasm-based contracts.

### Frontier EVM Contracts

[Frontier][] is the suite of tools that enables a Substrate chain to run Ethereum contacts
(EVM) natively with the same API/RPC interface, Ethereum exposes on Substrate. Ethereum Addresses
can also be mapped directly to and from Substrate's SS58 scheme from existing accounts.

### Substrate Contracts

Substrate offers a built-in
[contract pallet](https://docs.substrate.io/rustdocs/latest/pallet_contracts/index.html);
as time goes on, more parachains will support [WebAssembly](../learn/learn-wasm.md) smart contracts.
Additionally, there is the
[EVM Pallet](https://docs.substrate.io/v3/runtime/smart-contracts/#evm-pallet), which allows
a parachain to implement the Ethereum Virtual Machine, thereby supporting almost direct ports of
Ethereum contracts.

A video version of the recap of the smart contract situation is available
on the [Polkadot YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fKHkFBXaUxQ).

#### Resources

[When should I build a Substrate runtime versus a Substrate smart contract](https://stackoverflow.com/a/56041305)?
This post answers the question more technically of when a developer might choose to develop a
runtime versus a smart contract.

Here is the list of current resources available to developers who want to get started writing smart
contracts to deploy on parachains based on Substrate.

- [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink) - Parity's ink to write smart contracts.
- [Substrate ink! Workshop](https://docs.substrate.io/tutorials/v3/ink-workshop/pt1/) - Walks you
  through the basics of writing and deploying an ERC-20 token using `ink!`.

### Contracts Pallet

The experience of deploying to an EVM-based chain may be more familiar to developers that have
written smart contracts before. However, the Contracts pallet makes some notable improvements to the
design of the EVM:

1. **Wasm**. The Contracts pallet uses WebAssembly as its compilation target. Any language that
   compiles to Wasm can potentially be used to write smart contracts. Nevertheless, it is better to 
   have a dedicated domain-specific language, and for that reason Parity offers the [ink!](#ink) language.

2. **Rent**. Contracts must pay rent or else hold a deposit suitably large enough in order to
   justify its existence on-chain. When a contract does not uphold this, it may create what's called
   a *tombstone* which is a reference to the contract. In some conditions, the contract will be
   deleted outright along with its storage if it does not maintain these requirements.

3. **Caching**. Contracts are cached by default and therefore means they only need to be deployed
   once and afterward be instantiated as many times as you want. This helps to keep the storage load
   on the chain down to the minimum. On top of this, when a contract is no longer being used and the
   *existential deposit* is drained, the code will be erased from storage (known as reaping).

#### Storage Rent: Deprecated

`pallet_contracts` was initially designed to combat unbounded state growth by charging contracts for
the state they consume but has since been deprecated.

See the associated [pull request](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/9669) for more details.

### Polkadot Standards Proposals (PSPs)

Web3 Foundation supports proposals for Polkadot that define a set standards to fit ecosystem needs.
These standards go through several acceptance phases, where the engagement of the whole community is needed to build valuable and future-proof standards.
All the teams who will benefit from a standard need to agree on its content.

Some of these PSPs are targeting Substrate's `contracts` pallet:
- [PSP22 - Fungible Token Standard](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs/blob/master/PSPs/psp-22.md)
Please visit [Polkadot Standards Proposals (PSPs) Github](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) for more information.
### Ink

[ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink) is a domain specific language for writing smart contracts
in Rust and compiles to Wasm code. As it states in its README, it is still in an experimental phase
so brave developers should be aware that they might have a bumpy - but workable - development
experience. There are some projects that have built projects in ink! with a decent level of
complexity such as Plasm's [Plasma contracts][plasm plasma], so it is mature enough to start
building interesting things.

For interested developers, they can get started writing smart contracts using ink! by studying the
[examples](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/tree/master/examples) that were already written. These
can be used as guideposts to writing more complex logic that will be deployable on smart contract
parachains.

ink! has laid much of the groundwork for a new smart contract stack that is based on a Wasm virtual
machine and compatible with Substrate chains.

#### Libraries for Smart Contracts in `ink!`

Collected below are some community examples of smart contracts in `ink!`. **Are you working on a
smart contract example? Ask us to add it to this page!**

- [OpenBrush](https://docs.openbrush.io/): an `ink!` library providing standard contracts based on
  [PSP](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) with useful contracts and macros for building.
- [Metis](https://github.com/patractlabs/metis): a Wasm contract standard library, developed by [Patract Labs](https://patract.io/).

## Smart Contract Environments are still Maturing

It is still early for smart contracts on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }} 
{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} and the development is only now stabilizing.
We are actively producing content to help developers get up to speed and will maintain the Wiki 
with the latest resources. You should also keep up to date with the following links:

### Parity Tech

- [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink)
- [Substrate contracts pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/frame/contracts)

### Parachains

- [Edgeware][]
- [Moonbeam][]
- [Astar](https://astar.network/)
- [Acala](https://acala.network/)
- [Phala](https://phala.network)

Many smart contract platforms are building to become a parachain in the ecosystem. 
A community created and maintained list of different smart 
contract platforms building on Polkadot can be found at 
[PolkaProjects](https://www.polkaproject.com/#/projects?cateID=1&tagID=6).

#### Edgeware

[Edgeware][edgeware] is a permissionless smart contract platform. It is an option for smart contract 
developers and want to deploy to a live environment. Users can deploy both EVM and WASM smart contracts 
on Edgeware. Edgeware intends to connect to Polkadot and Kusama as a smart contract parachain.

Try deploying a smart contract on Edgeware by following their 
[documentation][edgeware contracts documentation].

#### Moonbeam

[Moonbeam][] is another project that is planning to deploy to Polkadot as a parachain and will
support Ethereum compatible smart contracts. Since Moonbeam uses [Frontier][], an interoperability layer 
with existing Ethereum tooling, it will support all applications that are written to target the EVM 
environment with little friction.

[Moonriver](https://docs.moonbeam.network/networks/moonriver/), a companion network to Moonbeam, launched 
as a parachain on Kusama. Parachain functionality is live, and features are being incrementally released. 
The final phase of the launch will include EVM functionality and balance transfers.

Try deploying a smart contract to Moonbeam by following their [documentation][moonbeam docs].

#### Astar

[Astar](https://astar.network/) (formerly Plasm) is built on Substrate as a smart contract platform and 
intends to integrate with Polkadot as a parachain. [Shiden](https://shiden.astar.network/) is the sister 
network to Astar, is currently live on Kusama, and supports EVM, WASM, and Layer 2 solutions. Astar aims 
to house all layer 2 scaling solutions and support all layer 2 protocols through the 
[OVM](https://docs.astar.network/learn/layer2/optimistic-virtual-machine) (Optimistic Virtual Machine).

Try deploying an Ethereum or ink! smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://docs.astar.network/build/smart-contracts).

#### Acala

[Acala](https://acala.network/) is a decentralized finance consortium and DeFi infrastructure chain 
delivering a set of protocols to serve as the DeFi hub on Polkadot. [Karura](https://acala.network/karura), 
Acala's canary network is live as a parachain on Kusama. Interested teams are now able to deploy DApps and 
smart contracts on Karura's platform. Acala is also implementing the 
[Acala EVM](https://wiki.acala.network/learn/acala-evm/why-acala-evm).

Try deploying an Acala EVM smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://wiki.acala.network/build/development-guide/smart-contracts).

#### Phala

[Phala](https://phala.network) is a privacy-preserving cloud compute platform and aims to provide strong 
guarantees of confidentiality as a cross-chain platform. As a smart contract platform, Phala will enable 
the use of confidential smart contracts on Polkadot. [Khala](https://phala.network/en/khala) is Phala's 
canary network and is live as a parachain on Kusama.

Try deploying a confidential smart contract by following their 
[documentation](https://wiki.phala.network/en-us/docs/developer/your-first-confidential-contract/).

## Keep In Touch

Even though the tooling is still maturing, the advantage of being early will be the familiarity and 
head start on your project, allowing you to innovate and create something truly new.

{{ polkadot: If you have interesting ideas for smart contracts on Polkadot, feel free to drop 
into the [Polkadot Watercooler](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org) to talk 
about them. Developers may be interested in joining the
[Polkadot Beginners Lounge](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadotnoobs:matrix.org) or
[Substrate Technical](https://matrix.to/#/#substrate-technical:matrix.org) to ask their questions.
As always, keep up to date with Polkadot and Kusama by following the
[social channels](../general/community.md). :polkadot }}

{{ kusama: If you have interesting ideas for smart contracts on Kusama, feel free to drop into the 
[Kusama Watercooler](https://matrix.to/#/#kusama-watercooler:matrix.org) to talk about them.
Developers may be interested in joining the
[Polkadot Beginners Lounge](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadotnoobs:matrix.org) or
[Substrate Technical](https://matrix.to/#/#substrate-technical:matrix.org) to ask their questions.
As always, keep up to date with Polkadot and Kusama by following the
[social channels](../general/community.md). :kusama }}

All the best.

[frontier]: https://github.com/paritytech/frontier
[contracts pallet]: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/contracts/
[edgeware]: https://edgewa.re
[edgeware documentation]: https://docs.edgewa.re/
[edgeware contracts documentation]: https://main.edgeware.wiki/development/develop/smart-contracts
[plasm plasma]: https://github.com/staketechnologies/Plasm
[moonbeam]: https://moonbeam.network
[moonbeam docs]: https://docs.moonbeam.network/
[frontier]: (https://github.com/paritytech/frontier)
