docs/build/build-oracle.md, before:

---
id: build-oracle
title: Oracles
sidebar_label: Oracles
description: Information about building with oracles.
slug: ../build-oracle
---

In the blockchain context, an _oracle_ is a way to bring real-world data onto the blockchain so that
it can be used by a decentralized application.

Oracles serve many purposes for application builders. For example:

- Most stablecoin designs use an oracle to bring in data of the exchange rate of assets, in order to
  peg their value to a real world currency.
- Synthetic assets use oracles as price feeds in order to determine if the underlying cryptocurrency
  sufficiently collateralizes the debt position.
- Prediction markets use oracles to decide the outcome of real world events and determine the payout
  of the prediction shares.
- Decentralized insurance markets use oracles to bring in information about whether a claim is valid
  or not.

Oracle solutions range from centralized and trusted to decentralized and game-theory based. On the
centralized end of the spectrum, an oracle could be a single account that has the authority to
dictate the real-world data on-chain. On the decentralized end, a [complex game of
"chicken"][schellingcoin] can be played among various staked actors who risk getting slashed if they
don't submit the same data as everyone else. Solutions such as [ChainLink][chainlink] fit somewhere
in the middle, where the amount of trust you put into the reporting oracles can be adjusted based on
your preferences. A Chainlink [Feed Pallet][feed pallet] was recently released to allow smart
contract applications across Polkadot to access price reference data, made available as a Substrate
oracle pallet.

When using an oracle in your application you should be aware of the benefits and risks that are
baked into its specific model. As the Polkadot ecosystem develops and oracle parachains begin to
appear, this article will be updated with a comparison of the different solutions and the benefits
and drawbacks that each provide.

[schellingcoin]: https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/03/28/schellingcoin-a-minimal-trust-universal-data-feed/
[chainlink]: https://polkadot.network/chainlink-reaches-milestone-with-polkadot/
[feed pallet]: https://github.com/smartcontractkit/chainlink-polkadot/blob/master/pallet-chainlink-feed/README.md

Commit message:

[2] Kusama Guide Revamp: Sections and Docs (#2630)
* init section revision - temp

* edit parachain development guide + add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering to wallets page + edits

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* remove kusama faucet page

* create one home page - getting started + edits

* add kusama faucet info to grants page via conditional rendering

* redistribute content in build starter; enhance parachain dev & smart contract guides

* re-add substrate content + guide enhancements

* reference Doc button on landing page to getting-started

* add 'What to Build' section

* add conditional rendering to hackathon guide + edits

* edits to tooling guide

* enhance builders guide: coherence, edits, clean-up + add conditional rendering

* encapsulate docs in appropriate sections

* add conditional rendering to build-index

* edit getting-started page with new references

* edits

* add conditional rendering to val community guide

* update sidebar structure

* add build guides to mirror script

* fix mirror script

* minor edits and grammar updates to kusama pages (#2704)

* enhance parachain development guide

* edits and add resources

* merge parachain implementers guide into development guide + edits

* Update sidebars.js

docs/build/build-oracle.md, after:

---
id: build-oracle
title: Oracles
sidebar_label: Oracles
description: Information about building with oracles.
slug: ../build-oracle
---

In the blockchain context, an *oracle* is a way to bring real-world data onto the blockchain so that
it can be used by a decentralized application.

Oracles serve many purposes for application builders. For example:

- Most stablecoin designs use an oracle to bring in data of the exchange rate of assets, in order to
  peg their value to a real world currency.
- Synthetic assets use oracles as price feeds in order to determine if the underlying cryptocurrency
  sufficiently collateralizes the debt position.
- Prediction markets use oracles to decide the outcome of real world events and determine the payout
  of the prediction shares.
- Decentralized insurance markets use oracles to bring in information about whether a claim is valid
  or not.

Oracle solutions range from centralized and trusted to decentralized and game-theory based. On the
centralized end of the spectrum, an oracle could be a single account that has the authority to
dictate the real-world data on-chain. On the decentralized end, a [complex game of
"chicken"][schellingcoin] can be played among various staked actors who risk getting slashed if they
don't submit the same data as everyone else. Solutions such as [ChainLink][chainlink] fit somewhere
in the middle, where the amount of trust you put into the reporting oracles can be adjusted based on
your preferences. A Chainlink [Feed Pallet][feed pallet] was recently released to allow smart
contract applications across {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }} {{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} to 
access price reference data, made available as a Substrate oracle pallet.

When using an oracle in your application you should be aware of the benefits and risks that are
baked into its specific model. As the {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} ecosystem develops and oracle parachains begin to appear, this
article will be updated with a comparison of the different solutions and the benefits and
drawbacks that each provide.

[schellingcoin]: https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/03/28/schellingcoin-a-minimal-trust-universal-data-feed/
[chainlink]: https://polkadot.network/chainlink-reaches-milestone-with-polkadot/
[feed pallet]: https://github.com/smartcontractkit/chainlink-polkadot/blob/master/pallet-chainlink-feed/README.md
