docs/build/build-hackathon.md, before:

---
id: build-hackathon
title: Polkadot Hackathons
sidebar_label: Polkadot Hackathons
description: Join or host a Hackathon.
slug: ../build-hackathon
---

## Join a Hackathon

Web3 Foundation regularly supports developer focused events! Be the first to know by signing
up for the [Polkadot newsletter](https://polkadot.network/) - the footer has a link to sign up!

## Host a Hackathon

As one of our objectives in the Web3 Foundation is promoting the
[Web3 technology stack](https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program/blob/master/grants/polkadot_stack.md)
, we would like to support any individual or team who wants to organize a hackathon that gets
more developers to understand Polkadot and Substrate in your city or online.

We are not only providing technical resources for you, but we can have someone from our team give a
hands-on workshop/presentation about the technology to help participants get started hacking on it
more quickly.

### Why you should host a hackathon?

- Connect with the W3F team and larger community
- Support Web3 education, opportunities, and more
- Learn the bleeding-edge technology
- Make lasting impact and gain connections in the community

## How do hackathons differ from workshops?

Hackathons (AKA Buildathons) are aimed at participants who want to deliver their prototype and
demonstrate their ideas to reality in a short period (few hours - one day), or online in a few
weeks. Workshops are more for getting developers familiar with the tooling and understanding
more about what are the resources currently available and how they can make use of it.

## How can you run a hackathon in your city?

Get in touch with the W3F team by [email] or ask us via our
[Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#w3f:matrix.org) chat.

## How we can help

- Provide technical resources/materials
- Help sourcing funding for facilitation and prizes.
- Finding a venue
- Marketing the event
- Ensure the hackathon runs smoothly

## Project & Event Theme Ideas

- NFTs
- Bonded tokens
- New governance pallets with different styles of voting & democracy
- Upgrade the TCR pallet
- IPFS integrations
- Decentralized identity solutions
- Oracle pallets
- Implement Generalized State Channel/Plasma Chain
- Decentralized Exchanges
- Tools for monitoring validator performance
- dApps across different parachains

### Previous Hackathons

Here are a few examples of hackathons W3F has facilitated and supported:

- [Polkadot Buildathon: India](https://polkadot-buildathon.devfolio.co/) - This India-focused
  hackathon was a 9-week online event.

- [Encode Hackathon](https://medium.com/encode-club/encode-hack-club-announcing-polkadot-c7cc6cc12920) -
  an externally facilitated event with a mix of learning challenges and prize pools for dApps
  as well as stand-alone blockchain project submissions.

- [Hello World! by Polkadot](https://gitcoin.co/hackathon/polkadot/onboard) - A collaborative
  hackathon celebrating the integration of Polkadot and Kusama into the Gitcoin platform. Has many
  sets of smaller challenges that will reward in either DOT or KSM.

- [Hackusama](https://hackusama.devpost.com/) - A 7-week online hackathon for
  developers to "Build a Blockchain" and submit your wildest tools, visualizations, and ideas to the
  "Open Hack" category.

## Resources

- [Substrate Knowledge Base](https://substrate.dev/docs/en/) - many introductory learning material
  lives here, that can be a feature of you hackathon or suggested prerequisite for those joining
  to use.

## Support / Contact

If you have any questions regarding organizing a hackathon, please free feel to contact us by
[email](mailto:events@web3.foundation) or ask us via
[Riot](https://riot.im/app/#/room/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org) chat.

Commit message:

[2] Kusama Guide Revamp: Sections and Docs (#2630)
* init section revision - temp

* edit parachain development guide + add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering to wallets page + edits

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* remove kusama faucet page

* create one home page - getting started + edits

* add kusama faucet info to grants page via conditional rendering

* redistribute content in build starter; enhance parachain dev & smart contract guides

* re-add substrate content + guide enhancements

* reference Doc button on landing page to getting-started

* add 'What to Build' section

* add conditional rendering to hackathon guide + edits

* edits to tooling guide

* enhance builders guide: coherence, edits, clean-up + add conditional rendering

* encapsulate docs in appropriate sections

* add conditional rendering to build-index

* edit getting-started page with new references

* edits

* add conditional rendering to val community guide

* update sidebar structure

* add build guides to mirror script

* fix mirror script

* minor edits and grammar updates to kusama pages (#2704)

* enhance parachain development guide

* edits and add resources

* merge parachain implementers guide into development guide + edits

* Update sidebars.js

docs/build/build-hackathon.md, after:

---
id: build-hackathon
title: Hackathons
sidebar_label: Hackathons
description: Join or host a Hackathon.
slug: ../build-hackathon
---

## Join a Hackathon

Web3 Foundation regularly supports developer focused events! Be the first to know by signing
up for the
{{ polkadot: [Polkadot newsletter](https://info.polkadot.network/subscribe) :polkadot }} 
{{ kusama: [Kusama newsletter](https://kusama.network/newsletter/) :kusama }}.


## Host a Hackathon

As one of our objectives in the Web3 Foundation is promoting the
[Web3 technology stack](https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program/blob/master/grants/polkadot_stack.md)
, we would like to support any individual or team who wants to organize a hackathon that gets
more developers to understand {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }} {{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} and 
Substrate in your city or online.

We are not only providing technical resources for you, but we can have someone from our team give a
hands-on workshop/presentation about the technology to help participants get started hacking on it
more quickly.

### Why you should host a hackathon?

- Connect with the Web3 Foundation team and larger community
- Support Web 3.0 education, opportunities, and more
- Learn the bleeding-edge technology
- Make lasting impact and gain connections in the community

## How do hackathons differ from workshops?

Hackathons (AKA Buildathons) are aimed at participants who want to deliver their prototype and
demonstrate their ideas to reality in a short period (few hours - one day), or online in a few
weeks. Workshops are more for getting developers familiar with the tooling and understanding
more about what are the resources currently available and how they can make use of it.

## How can you run a hackathon in your city?

Get in touch with the W3F team by [email] or ask us via our
[Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#w3f:matrix.org) chat.

## How we can help

- Provide technical resources/materials
- Help sourcing funding for facilitation and prizes.
- Finding a venue
- Marketing the event
- Ensure the hackathon runs smoothly

## Project & Event Theme Ideas

- NFTs
- Bonded tokens
- New governance pallets with different styles of voting & democracy
- Upgrade the TCR pallet
- IPFS integrations
- Decentralized identity solutions
- Oracle pallets
- Implement Generalized State Channel/Plasma Chain
- Decentralized Exchanges
- Tools for monitoring validator performance
- dApps across different parachains

### Previous Hackathons

Here are a few examples of hackathons W3F has facilitated and supported:

- [Polkadot Buildathon: India](https://polkadot-buildathon.devfolio.co/) - This India-focused
  hackathon was a 9-week online event.

- [Encode Hackathon](https://medium.com/encode-club/encode-hack-club-announcing-polkadot-c7cc6cc12920) -
  an externally facilitated event with a mix of learning challenges and prize pools for dApps
  as well as stand-alone blockchain project submissions.

- [Hello World! by Polkadot](https://gitcoin.co/hackathon/polkadot/onboard) - A collaborative
  hackathon celebrating the integration of Polkadot and Kusama into the Gitcoin platform. Has many
  sets of smaller challenges that will reward in either DOT or KSM.

- [Hackusama](https://hackusama.devpost.com/) - A 7-week online hackathon for
  developers to "Build a Blockchain" and submit your wildest tools, visualizations, and ideas to the
  "Open Hack" category.

## Resources

- [Substrate Knowledge Base](https://substrate.dev/docs/en/) - many introductory learning material
  lives here, that can be a feature of you hackathon or suggested prerequisite for those joining
  to use.

## Support / Contact

If you have any questions regarding organizing a hackathon, please free feel to contact us by
[email](mailto:events@web3.foundation) or ask us via
[Element](https://riot.im/app/#/room/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org) chat.
