docs/build/build-index.md, before:

---
id: build-index
title: Builder's Guides
sidebar_label: Builder's Guides
description: Reference point for the Polkadot builder guides.
slug: ../build-index
---

Welcome to the builder's section of the Polkadot Wiki.

Here, you will discover many development tools and resources in the Polkadot ecosystem.
We are always adding new tools and frameworks as we learn about them so if you are working
on something that should be included please reach out to us on
[Element](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org)!

This section of the wiki is divided into the following parts:

## Development Guide

- [Starter's Guide](build-guide.md) - High level overview on choosing a parachain,
  parathread, or smart contract for your project and how to get started.
- [Parachain Development](build-parachains.md) - Tools for building parachains and
  parathreads.
- [Polkadot Smart Contracts](build-smart-contracts.md) - Tools to deploy contracts to a Polkadot parachain.

## Integration Guide

This section is for service providers like wallets or node operators who want to learn how to
integrate Polkadot into their systems.

- [Integration Initiation](build-integration.md) - The guide to the guide.
- [Polkadot Protocol Information](build-protocol-info.md) - General information and F.A.Q.s about
  the Polkadot protocol, e.g. address formats.
- [Node Management](build-node-management.md) - A short overview of the Parity Polkadot client and
  the most relevant options/flags for infrastructure providers.
- [Node Interaction](build-node-interaction.md) - Learn how to interact with your node via RPC.
- [Transaction Construction and Signing](build-transaction-construction.md) - Learn the transaction
  format for Polkadot and how to construct and sign transactions offline.

## Tools & Resources

- [Tools](build-tools-index.md) - Maintained list of tools.
- [Subkey](https://substrate.dev/docs/en/knowledgebase/integrate/subkey) - Command line utility for
  generating and inspecting key pairs.
- [JS tools](https://github.com/polkadot-js/tools) - TypeScript tools for offline signing of
  transactions, RPC calls, and more.
- [PSP GitHub Repository](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) - Polkadot Standards Proposals
  (PSPs) are standards for the Polkadot ecosystem.
- [Examples](#) - Example projects sourced from the community -- see what others are building.

### Grants

- [Grants](../general/grants.md) - A list of all Polkadot-related projects given grants by the Web3 Foundation.

### PSPs

Polkadot Standards Proposals (PSPs) are standards for the Polkadot ecosystem.

- [PSP GitHub Repository](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) - Read, create, or discuss standards and
  proposals.

### Hackathon

- [Resources For Running a Hackathon](build-hackathon.md)

Commit message:

[2] Kusama Guide Revamp: Sections and Docs (#2630)
* init section revision - temp

* edit parachain development guide + add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering to wallets page + edits

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* add conditional rendering

* remove kusama faucet page

* create one home page - getting started + edits

* add kusama faucet info to grants page via conditional rendering

* redistribute content in build starter; enhance parachain dev & smart contract guides

* re-add substrate content + guide enhancements

* reference Doc button on landing page to getting-started

* add 'What to Build' section

* add conditional rendering to hackathon guide + edits

* edits to tooling guide

* enhance builders guide: coherence, edits, clean-up + add conditional rendering

* encapsulate docs in appropriate sections

* add conditional rendering to build-index

* edit getting-started page with new references

* edits

* add conditional rendering to val community guide

* update sidebar structure

* add build guides to mirror script

* fix mirror script

* minor edits and grammar updates to kusama pages (#2704)

* enhance parachain development guide

* edits and add resources

* merge parachain implementers guide into development guide + edits

* Update sidebars.js

docs/build/build-index.md, after:

---
id: build-index
title: Builder's Guides
sidebar_label: Builder's Guides
description: Reference point for the Polkadot builder guides.
slug: ../build-index
---

Welcome to the builder's section of the {{ polkadot: Polkadot Wiki :polkadot }} 
{{ kusama: Kusama Guide:kusama }}.

Here, you will discover many development tools and resources in the Polkadot ecosystem.
We are always adding new tools and frameworks as we learn about them so if you are working
on something that should be included please reach out to us on
{{ polkadot: [Element](https://matrix.to/#/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org) :polkadot }} 
{{ kusama: [Element](https://matrix.to/#/#kusama-watercooler:matrix.org) :kusama }}.
This section of the wiki is divided into the following parts:

## Development Guide

- [Starter's Guide](build-guide.md) - High level overview on choosing a parachain,
  parathread, or smart contract for your project and how to get started.
- [Parachain Development](build-parachains.md) - Tools for building parachains and
  parathreads.
- [Polkadot Smart Contracts](build-smart-contracts.md) - Tools to deploy contracts to a Polkadot parachain.

## Tools & Resources

- [Tools](build-tools-index.md) - Maintained list of tools.
- [Subkey](https://substrate.dev/docs/en/knowledgebase/integrate/subkey) - Command line utility for
  generating and inspecting key pairs.
- [JS tools](https://github.com/polkadot-js/tools) - TypeScript tools for offline signing of
  transactions, RPC calls, and more.
- [PSP GitHub Repository](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) - Polkadot Standards Proposals
  (PSPs) are standards for the Polkadot ecosystem.
- [Examples](#) - Example projects sourced from the community -- see what others are building.

### Grants

- [Grants](../general/grants.md) - A list of all Polkadot-related projects given grants by the Web3 Foundation.

### PSPs

Polkadot Standards Proposals (PSPs) are standards for the Polkadot ecosystem.

- [PSP GitHub Repository](https://github.com/w3f/PSPs) - Read, create, or discuss standards and
  proposals.

### Hackathon

- [Resources For Running a Hackathon](build-hackathon.md)
