docs/maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating.md, before:

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating
title: How to Stop Validating
sidebar_label: How to Stop Validating
description: Steps on how to stop validating.
keywords: [validating, how to stop validating, validate, chill]
slug: ../maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating
---

If you wish to remain a validator or nominator (e.g. you're only stopping for planned downtime or
server maintenance), submitting the `chill` extrinsic in the `staking` pallet should suffice. It is
only if you wish to unbond funds or reap an account that you should continue with the following.

To ensure a smooth stop to validation, make sure you should do the following actions:

- Chill your validator
- Purge validator session keys
- Unbond your tokens

These can all be done with [PolkadotJS Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps) interface or with
extrinsics.

## Chill Validator

To chill your validator or nominator, call the `staking.chill()` extrinsic. See the
[How to Chill](maintain-guides-how-to-chill.md) page for more information. You can also
[claim your rewards](../learn/learn-simple-payouts.md#claiming-rewards) at this time.

## Purge validator session keys

Purging the validator's session keys removes the key reference to your stash. This can be done
through the `session.purgeKeys()` extrinsic with the controller account.

:::caution 

**If you skip this step, you will not be able to reap your stash account**, and you will also need to rebond, purge the session keys, unbond, and wait the unbonding period 
again before being able to transfer your tokens. 

See [Unbonding and Rebonding](maintain-guides-how-to-unbond.md) for more details.

:::

## Unbond your tokens

Unbonding your tokens can be done through the `Network > Staking > Account actions` page in
PolkadotJS Apps by clicking the corresponding stash account dropdown and selecting "Unbond funds".
This can also be done through the `staking.unbond()` extrinsic with the controller account.

Commit message:

Update maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating.md (#3528)
* Update maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating.md

Added warning about purging keys from the proper account

* minor fixes and prettify

* rephrasing caution

Co-authored-by: Radha <86818441+DrW3RK@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/maintain/maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating.md, after:

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating
title: How to Stop Validating
sidebar_label: How to Stop Validating
description: Steps on how to stop validating.
keywords: [validating, how to stop validating, validate, chill]
slug: ../maintain-guides-how-to-stop-validating
---

If you wish to remain a validator or nominator (e.g. you're only stopping for planned downtime or
server maintenance), submitting the `chill` extrinsic in the `staking` pallet should suffice. It is
only if you wish to unbond funds or reap an account that you should continue with the following.

To ensure a smooth stop to validation, make sure you should do the following actions:

- Chill your validator
- Purge validator session keys
- Unbond your tokens

These can all be done with [PolkadotJS Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps) interface or with
extrinsics.

## Chill Validator

To chill your validator or nominator, call the `staking.chill()` extrinsic. See the
[How to Chill](maintain-guides-how-to-chill.md) page for more information. You can also
[claim your rewards](../learn/learn-simple-payouts.md#claiming-rewards) at this time.

## Purge validator session keys

Purging the validator's session keys removes the key reference. This can be done through the
`session.purgeKeys()` extrinsic. The key reference exists on the account that originally called the
`session.set_keys()` extrinsic, which could be the stash or the controller (at the time the keys
were set).

:::caution Purge keys using the same account that set the keys

Make sure to call the session.purge_keys() extrinsic from the same account that set the keys in the 
first place in order for the correct reference to be removed. Calling the `session.purge_keys()` from 
the wrong account, although it may succeed, will result in a reference on the other account that
**cannot** be removed, and as a result that account cannot be reaped.

:::

:::caution

**If you skip this step, you will not be able to reap your stash account**, and you will also need
to rebond, purge the session keys, unbond, and wait the unbonding period again before being able to
transfer your tokens.

See [Unbonding and Rebonding](maintain-guides-how-to-unbond.md) for more details.

:::

## Unbond your tokens

Unbonding your tokens can be done through the `Network > Staking > Account actions` page in
PolkadotJS Apps by clicking the corresponding stash account dropdown and selecting "Unbond funds".
This can also be done through the `staking.unbond()` extrinsic with the controller account.
