docs/maintain/kusama/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama.md, before:

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama
title: Be a Nominator (Kusama)
sidebar_label: Nominator Guide
description: Steps on how to nominate on Kusama.
slug: ../../maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama
---

> The following information applies to the Kusama network. If you want to nominate on Polkadot,
> check out the [Polkadot guide](../maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-polkadot.md) instead.

Nominators are one type of participant in the staking subsystem of Polkadot. They are responsible
for appointing their stake to the validators who are the second type of participant. By appointing
their stake, they are able to elect the active set of validators and share in the rewards that are
paid out.

While the [validators][] are active participants in the network that engage in the block production
and finality mechanisms, nominators take a more passive role with a "set-it-and-forget-it" approach.
Being a nominator does not require running a node of your own or worrying about online uptime.
However, a good nominator performs due diligence on the validators that they elect. When looking for
validators to nominate, a nominator should pay attention to their own reward percentage for
nominating a specific validator - as well as the risk that they bear of being slashed if the
validator gets slashed.

## Setting up Stash and Controller keys

> If you prefer a video format, the following videos related to staking are available:
>
> - [Staking with a Ledger and PolkadotJS Apps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VN4S8MofEW8)
> - [Staking with a Ledger and Ledger Live](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obZyGeHrm_M&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8&index=43)

Nominators are recommended to set up two separate stash and controller accounts. Explanation and
reasoning for generating distinct accounts for this purpose is elaborated in the [keys][] section of
the Wiki.

You can generate your stash and controller account via any of the recommended methods that are
detailed on the [account generation][] page.

Starting with runtime version v2023 natively included in client version
[0.8.23](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/releases/tag/v0.8.23), payouts can go to any custom
address. If you'd like to redirect payments to an account that is neither the controller nor the
stash account, set one up. Note that it is extremely unsafe to set an exchange address as the
recipient of the staking rewards.

## Using Polkadot-JS UI

### Step 1: Bond your tokens

On the [Polkadot-JS UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps) navigate to the "Staking" tab (within the
"Network" menu).

The "Staking Overview" subsection will show you all the active validators and their information -
their identities, the amount of KSM that are staking for them, amount that is their own provided
stake, how much they charge in commission, the era points they've earned in the current era, and the
last block number that they produced. If you click on the chart button it will take you to the
"Validator Stats" page for that validator that shows you more detailed and historical information
about the validator's stake, rewards and slashes.

The "Account actions" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/actions)) allows you
to stake and nominate.

The "Payouts" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/payouts)) allows you to
claim rewards from staking.

The "Targets" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/targets)) will help you
estimate your earnings and this is where it's good to start picking favorites.

The "Waiting" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/waiting)) lists all pending
validators that are awaiting more nominations to enter the active validator set. Validators will
stay in the waiting queue until they have enough KSM backing them (as allocated through the
[Phragmén election mechanism](../../learn/learn-phragmen.md)). It is possible validator can remain in the queue
for a very long time if they never get enough backing.

The "Validator Stats" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/query)) allows you
to query a validator's stash address and see historical charts on era points, elected stake,
rewards, and slashes.

Pick "Account actions" underneath "Network" > "Staking", then click the "+ Nominator" button.

You will see a modal window that looks like the below:

![nominator-update-1](../../assets/kusama/kusama_nominator_popup.png)

Select a "value bonded" that is **less** than the total amount of KSM you have, so you have some
left over to pay transaction fees. Transaction fees are currently at least 0.01 KSM, but they are
dynamic based on a variety of factors including the load of recent blocks.

Also be mindful of the reaping threshold - the amount that must remain in an account lest it be
burned. That amount is 0.01 in Kusama, so it's recommended to keep at least 0.1 KSM in your account
to be on the safe side.

Choose whatever payment destination that makes sense to you. If you're unsure, you can choose "Stash
account (increase amount at stake)" to simply accrue the rewards into the amount you're staking and
earn compound interest.

![Payout account selection dropdown with the custom account option highlighted](../../assets/payout/01.png)

> These concepts have been further explained in Polkadot's
> [UI Walkthrough Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8)

### Step 2: Nominate a validator

You are now bonded. Being bonded means your tokens are locked and could be
[slashed](../../learn/learn-staking.md#slashing) if the validators you nominate misbehave. All bonded funds can
now be distributed to up to 16 validators. Be careful about the validators you choose since you will
be slashed if your validator commits an offence.

Click on "Nominate" on an account you've bonded and you will be presented with another popup asking
you to select some validators.

![Nominating validators](../../assets/kusama/kusama_nominator_selection.png)

Select them, confirm the transaction, and you're done - you are now nominating. Your nominations
will become active in the next era. Eras last six hours on Kusama - depending on when you do this,
your nominations may become active almost immediately, or you may have to wait almost the entire six
hours before your nominations are active. You can check how far along Kusama is in the current era
on the [Staking page](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking).

Assuming at least one of your nominations ends up in the active validator set, you will start to get
rewards allocated to you. In order to claim them (i.e., add them to your account), you must manually
claim them. To initiate a claim, you can do it yourself or have the validator that you staked for
initiate a claim. This is to help optimize the effectiveness and storage of payouts on Kusama. See
the [Claiming Rewards](../../learn/learn-staking.md#claiming-rewards) section of the Staking wiki page for more
details.

### Step 3: Stop nominating

At some point, you might decide to stop nominating one or more validators. You can always change who
you're nominating, but you cannot withdraw your tokens unless you unbond them. Detailed instructions
are available [here](../maintain-guides-how-to-unbond.md).

## Using Command-Line Interface (CLI)

Apart from using the Polkadot-JS UI to participate in the staking, you can do all these things in
CLI instead. The CLI approach allows you to interact with the Polkadot / Kusama network without
going to the PolkadotJS dashboard.

### Step 1: Install @polkadot/api-cli

We assume you have installed [NodeJS with npm](https://nodejs.org). Run the following command to
install the `@polkadot/api-cli` globally:

```bash
npm install -g @polkadot/api-cli
```

### Step 2. Bond your KSM

Executing the following command:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "MNEMONIC_PHRASE" tx.staking.bond CONTROLLER_ADDRESS NUMBER_OF_TOKENS REWARD_DESTINATION --ws WEBSOCKET_ENDPOINT
```

`CONTROLLER_ADDRESS`: An address you would like to bond to the stash account. Stash and Controller
can be the same address but it is not recommended since it defeats the security of the two-account
staking model.

`NUMBER_OF_TOKENS`: The number of KSM / DOT you would like to stake to the network. **Note**: KSM
has twelve decimal places and is always represented as an integer with zeroes at the end. So 1 KSM =
1_000_000_000_000 Plancks.

`REWARD_DESTINATION`:

- `Staked` - Pay into the stash account, increasing the amount at stake accordingly.
- `Stash` - Pay into the stash account, not increasing the amount at stake.
- `Account` - Pay into a custom account, like so:
  `Account DMTHrNcmA8QbqRS4rBq8LXn8ipyczFoNMb1X4cY2WD9tdBX`.
- `Controller` - Pay into the controller account.

Example:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "xxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx" tx.staking.bond DMTHrNcmA8QbqRS4rBq8LXn8ipyczFoNMb1X4cY2WD9tdBX 1000000000000 Staked --ws wss://kusama-rpc.polkadot.io/
```

Result:

```bash
...
...
    "status": {
      "InBlock": "0x0ed1ec0ba69564e8f98958d69f826adef895b5617366a32a3aa384290e98514e"
    }
```

You can check the transaction status by using the value of the `InBlock` in
[Polkascan](https://polkascan.io/pre/kusama). Also, you can verify the bonding state under the
[Staking](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/actions) page on the Polkadot-JS Apps Dashboard.

### Step 3. Nominate a validator

To nominate a validator, you can execute the following command:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "MNEMONIC_PHRASE" tx.staking.nominate '["VALIDATOR_ADDRESS"]' --ws WS_ENDPOINT
```

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "xxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx" tx.staking.nominate '["CmD9vaMYoiKe7HiFnfkftwvhKbxN9bhyjcDrfFRGbifJEG8","E457XaKbj2yTB2URy8N4UuzmyuFRkcdxYs67UvSgVr7HyFb"]' --ws wss://kusama-rpc.polkadot.io/
```

After a few seconds, you should see the hash of the transaction and if you would like to verify the
nomination status, you can check that on the Polkadot-JS UI as well.

[validators]: maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama.md
[keys]: ../../learn/learn-keys.md###"controller"-and-"stash"-keys
[account generation]: ../../learn/learn-account-generation.md

Commit message:

include missing docs to kusama guide and enhance sidebar

docs/maintain/kusama/maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama.md, after:

---
id: maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama
title: Become a Nominator on Kusama
sidebar_label: How to Nominate on Kusama
description: Steps on how to nominate on Kusama.
slug: ../../maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-kusama
---

> The following information applies to the Kusama network. If you want to nominate on Polkadot,
> check out the [Polkadot guide](../maintain-guides-how-to-nominate-polkadot.md) instead.

Nominators are one type of participant in the staking subsystem of Polkadot. They are responsible
for appointing their stake to the validators who are the second type of participant. By appointing
their stake, they are able to elect the active set of validators and share in the rewards that are
paid out.

While the [validators][] are active participants in the network that engage in the block production
and finality mechanisms, nominators take a more passive role with a "set-it-and-forget-it" approach.
Being a nominator does not require running a node of your own or worrying about online uptime.
However, a good nominator performs due diligence on the validators that they elect. When looking for
validators to nominate, a nominator should pay attention to their own reward percentage for
nominating a specific validator - as well as the risk that they bear of being slashed if the
validator gets slashed.

## Setting up Stash and Controller keys

> If you prefer a video format, the following videos related to staking are available:
>
> - [Staking with a Ledger and PolkadotJS Apps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VN4S8MofEW8)
> - [Staking with a Ledger and Ledger Live](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=obZyGeHrm_M&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8&index=43)

Nominators are recommended to set up two separate stash and controller accounts. Explanation and
reasoning for generating distinct accounts for this purpose is elaborated in the [keys][] section of
the Wiki.

You can generate your stash and controller account via any of the recommended methods that are
detailed on the [account generation][] page.

Starting with runtime version v2023 natively included in client version
[0.8.23](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/releases/tag/v0.8.23), payouts can go to any custom
address. If you'd like to redirect payments to an account that is neither the controller nor the
stash account, set one up. Note that it is extremely unsafe to set an exchange address as the
recipient of the staking rewards.

## Using Polkadot-JS UI

### Step 1: Bond your tokens

On the [Polkadot-JS UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps) navigate to the "Staking" tab (within the
"Network" menu).

The "Staking Overview" subsection will show you all the active validators and their information -
their identities, the amount of KSM that are staking for them, amount that is their own provided
stake, how much they charge in commission, the era points they've earned in the current era, and the
last block number that they produced. If you click on the chart button it will take you to the
"Validator Stats" page for that validator that shows you more detailed and historical information
about the validator's stake, rewards and slashes.

The "Account actions" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/actions)) allows you
to stake and nominate.

The "Payouts" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/payouts)) allows you to
claim rewards from staking.

The "Targets" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/targets)) will help you
estimate your earnings and this is where it's good to start picking favorites.

The "Waiting" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/waiting)) lists all pending
validators that are awaiting more nominations to enter the active validator set. Validators will
stay in the waiting queue until they have enough KSM backing them (as allocated through the
[Phragmén election mechanism](../../learn/learn-phragmen.md)). It is possible validator can remain in the queue
for a very long time if they never get enough backing.

The "Validator Stats" subsection ([link](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/query)) allows you
to query a validator's stash address and see historical charts on era points, elected stake,
rewards, and slashes.

Pick "Account actions" underneath "Network" > "Staking", then click the "+ Nominator" button.

You will see a modal window that looks like the below:

![nominator-update-1](../../assets/kusama/kusama_nominator_popup.png)

Select a "value bonded" that is **less** than the total amount of KSM you have, so you have some
left over to pay transaction fees. Transaction fees are currently at least 0.01 KSM, but they are
dynamic based on a variety of factors including the load of recent blocks.

Also be mindful of the reaping threshold - the amount that must remain in an account lest it be
burned. That amount is 0.01 in Kusama, so it's recommended to keep at least 0.1 KSM in your account
to be on the safe side.

Choose whatever payment destination that makes sense to you. If you're unsure, you can choose "Stash
account (increase amount at stake)" to simply accrue the rewards into the amount you're staking and
earn compound interest.

![Payout account selection dropdown with the custom account option highlighted](../../assets/payout/01.png)

> These concepts have been further explained in Polkadot's
> [UI Walkthrough Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAuS00rK-pebTMAOxW41W8)

### Step 2: Nominate a validator

You are now bonded. Being bonded means your tokens are locked and could be
[slashed](../../learn/learn-staking.md#slashing) if the validators you nominate misbehave. All bonded funds can
now be distributed to up to 16 validators. Be careful about the validators you choose since you will
be slashed if your validator commits an offence.

Click on "Nominate" on an account you've bonded and you will be presented with another popup asking
you to select some validators.

![Nominating validators](../../assets/kusama/kusama_nominator_selection.png)

Select them, confirm the transaction, and you're done - you are now nominating. Your nominations
will become active in the next era. Eras last six hours on Kusama - depending on when you do this,
your nominations may become active almost immediately, or you may have to wait almost the entire six
hours before your nominations are active. You can check how far along Kusama is in the current era
on the [Staking page](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking).

Assuming at least one of your nominations ends up in the active validator set, you will start to get
rewards allocated to you. In order to claim them (i.e., add them to your account), you must manually
claim them. To initiate a claim, you can do it yourself or have the validator that you staked for
initiate a claim. This is to help optimize the effectiveness and storage of payouts on Kusama. See
the [Claiming Rewards](../../learn/learn-staking.md#claiming-rewards) section of the Staking wiki page for more
details.

### Step 3: Stop nominating

At some point, you might decide to stop nominating one or more validators. You can always change who
you're nominating, but you cannot withdraw your tokens unless you unbond them. Detailed instructions
are available [here](../maintain-guides-how-to-unbond.md).

## Using Command-Line Interface (CLI)

Apart from using the Polkadot-JS UI to participate in the staking, you can do all these things in
CLI instead. The CLI approach allows you to interact with the Polkadot / Kusama network without
going to the PolkadotJS dashboard.

### Step 1: Install @polkadot/api-cli

We assume you have installed [NodeJS with npm](https://nodejs.org). Run the following command to
install the `@polkadot/api-cli` globally:

```bash
npm install -g @polkadot/api-cli
```

### Step 2. Bond your KSM

Executing the following command:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "MNEMONIC_PHRASE" tx.staking.bond CONTROLLER_ADDRESS NUMBER_OF_TOKENS REWARD_DESTINATION --ws WEBSOCKET_ENDPOINT
```

`CONTROLLER_ADDRESS`: An address you would like to bond to the stash account. Stash and Controller
can be the same address but it is not recommended since it defeats the security of the two-account
staking model.

`NUMBER_OF_TOKENS`: The number of KSM / DOT you would like to stake to the network. **Note**: KSM
has twelve decimal places and is always represented as an integer with zeroes at the end. So 1 KSM =
1_000_000_000_000 Plancks.

`REWARD_DESTINATION`:

- `Staked` - Pay into the stash account, increasing the amount at stake accordingly.
- `Stash` - Pay into the stash account, not increasing the amount at stake.
- `Account` - Pay into a custom account, like so:
  `Account DMTHrNcmA8QbqRS4rBq8LXn8ipyczFoNMb1X4cY2WD9tdBX`.
- `Controller` - Pay into the controller account.

Example:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "xxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx" tx.staking.bond DMTHrNcmA8QbqRS4rBq8LXn8ipyczFoNMb1X4cY2WD9tdBX 1000000000000 Staked --ws wss://kusama-rpc.polkadot.io/
```

Result:

```bash
...
...
    "status": {
      "InBlock": "0x0ed1ec0ba69564e8f98958d69f826adef895b5617366a32a3aa384290e98514e"
    }
```

You can check the transaction status by using the value of the `InBlock` in
[Polkascan](https://polkascan.io/pre/kusama). Also, you can verify the bonding state under the
[Staking](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/actions) page on the Polkadot-JS Apps Dashboard.

### Step 3. Nominate a validator

To nominate a validator, you can execute the following command:

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "MNEMONIC_PHRASE" tx.staking.nominate '["VALIDATOR_ADDRESS"]' --ws WS_ENDPOINT
```

```bash
polkadot-js-api --seed "xxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx" tx.staking.nominate '["CmD9vaMYoiKe7HiFnfkftwvhKbxN9bhyjcDrfFRGbifJEG8","E457XaKbj2yTB2URy8N4UuzmyuFRkcdxYs67UvSgVr7HyFb"]' --ws wss://kusama-rpc.polkadot.io/
```

After a few seconds, you should see the hash of the transaction and if you would like to verify the
nomination status, you can check that on the Polkadot-JS UI as well.

[validators]: maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama.md
[keys]: ../../learn/learn-keys.md###"controller"-and-"stash"-keys
[account generation]: ../../learn/learn-account-generation.md
