docs/learn/learn-identity.md, before:

---
id: learn-identity
title: Identity
sidebar_label: Identity
description: Learn about on-chain identity, judgements and registrars.
keywords: [identity, registrars, judgements]
slug: ../learn-identity
---
import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection"

{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} provides a naming system that allows 
participants to add personal information to their on-chain account and subsequently ask for verification 
of this information by [registrars](#registrars).

## Setting an Identity

Users can set an identity by registering through default fields such as legal name, display name,
website, Twitter handle, Riot handle, etc. along with some extra, custom fields for which they would
like attestations (see [Judgements](#judgements)).

Users must reserve funds in a bond to store their information on chain: 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={202580000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={33333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }} and 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.fieldDeposit" defaultValue={660000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.fieldDeposit" defaultValue={8333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}
per each field beyond the legal name.
These funds are *locked*, not spent - they are returned when the identity is cleared.

These amounts can also be extracted by querying constants through the
[Chain state constants](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/chainstate/constants) tab on
Polkadot-JS Apps.

:::info Instructions for setting and clearing Identities

The procedure to set and clear identities is explained in detail in this support article - 
[How to set and clear an Identity](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181981-how-to-set-and-clear-an-identity) 

:::

:::note 

The Ledger app doesn't support the extrinsic for setting identity yet. As a workaround, create a primary
identity with an on-chain account and then using that primary identity, assign a [sub-identity](#sub-accounts) 
to the Ledger stash.

:::

### Format Caveat

Please note the following caveat: because the fields support different formats, from raw bytes to
various hashes, a UI has no way of telling how to encode a given field it encounters. The Polkadot-JS
UI currently encodes the raw bytes it encounters as UTF8 strings, which makes these values readable
on-screen. However, given that there are no restrictions on the values that can be placed into these
fields, a different UI may interpret them as, for example, IPFS hashes or encoded bitmaps. This
means any field stored as raw bytes will become unreadable by that specific UI. As field standards
crystallize, things will become easier to use but for now, every custom implementation of displaying
user information will likely have to make a conscious decision on the approach to take, or support
multiple formats and then attempt multiple encodings until the output makes sense.


## Judgements

After a user injects their information on chain, they can request judgement from a registrar. Users
declare a maximum fee that they are willing to pay for judgement, and registrars whose fee is below
that amount can provide a judgement.

When a registrar provides judgement, they can select up to six levels of confidence in their
attestation:

- Unknown: The default value, no judgement made yet.
- Reasonable: The data appears reasonable, but no in-depth checks (e.g. formal KYC process) were
  performed.
- Known Good: The registrar has certified that the information is correct.
- Out of Date: The information used to be good, but is now out of date.
- Low Quality: The information is low quality or imprecise, but can be fixed with an update.
- Erroneous: The information is erroneous and may indicate malicious intent.

A seventh state, "fee paid", is for when a user has requested judgement and it is in progress.
Information that is in this state or "erroneous" is "sticky" and cannot be modified; it can only be
removed by the complete removal of the identity.

Registrars gain trust by performing proper due diligence and would presumably be replaced for
issuing faulty judgements.

To be judged after submitting your identity information, go to the
["Extrinsics UI"](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/extrinsics) and select the `identity` pallet, then
`requestJudgement`. For the `reg_index` put the index of the registrar you want to be judged by, and
for the `max_fee` put the maximum you're willing to pay for these confirmations.

If you don't know which registrar to pick, first check the available registrars by going to
["Chain State UI"](#) and selecting `identity.registrars()` to get the full list.

:::info Instructions for requesting and cancelling Identity judegements

The procedure to request and cancel identity judgements is explained in detail in this
[support article](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181990-how-to-request-and-cancel-identity-judgement)

:::

:::caution

The set identity calls go on-chain. Hence, the contact information is available publicly, for both legitimate entities, like registrars or validators, but also scammers who might impersonate them. The strings in the identity fields are good candidates for homograph attacks, as someone could list a fraudulent website (web3.f0undation instead of web3.foundation for example) and still get verified by the registrar (if the checks are automated)!

In a decentralized network, one should be cautious making transactions with accounts solely based on their identity. If an account on-chain claims to be of Web3 Foundation, it is wise to verify its authenticity by checking directly with Web3 Foundation or examining the established history of that account on-chain.

:::

## Registrars

Registrars can set a fee for their services and limit their attestation to certain fields. For
example, a registrar could charge {{ kusama: 0.1 KSM :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1 DOT :polkadot }} to 
verify one's legal name, email, and GPG key. When a user requests judgement, they will pay this fee 
to the registrar who provides the judgement on those claims. Users set a maximum fee they are willing 
to pay and only registrars below this amount would provide judgement.

### Becoming a Registrar

To become a registrar, submit a pre-image and proposal into
[Democracy](../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md), then wait for people to vote
on it. For best results, write a post about your identity and intentions beforehand, and once the
proposal is in the queue ask people to endorse it so that it gets ahead in the referendum queue.

Here's how to submit a proposal to become a registrar:

Go to the Democracy tab, select "Submit preimage", and input the information for this motion -
notably which account you're nominating to be a registrar in the `identity.setRegistrar` function.

![Setting a registrar](../assets/identity/12.jpg)

Copy the preimage hash. In the above image, that's
`0x90a1b2f648fc4eaff4f236b9af9ead77c89ecac953225c5fafb069d27b7131b7`. Submit the preimage by signing
a transaction.

Next, select "Submit Proposal" and enter the previously copied preimage hash. The `locked balance`
field needs to be at least 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={202580000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={33333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}. 
You can find out the minimum by querying the chain state under [Chain State](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/chainstate) -> Constants -> democracy -> minimumDeposit.

![Submitting a proposal](../assets/identity/13.jpg)

At this point, DOT holders can endorse the motion. With enough endorsements, the motion 
will become a referendum, which is then voted on. If it passes, users will be able to 
request judgement from this registrar.

### Current Registrars

There are multiple registrars on {{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}. 
Unless no additional information is available here, you must reach out to specific registrars 
individually if you want to be judged by those.

Registrar 0:  <br />
**URL**: https://registrar.web3.foundation/  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: H4XieK3r3dq3VEvRtqZR7wN7a1UEkXxf14orRsEfdFjmgkF,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 12j3Cz8qskCGJxmSJpVL2z2t3Fpmw3KoBaBaRGPnuibFc7o8,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama:  0.04 KSM  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 0 DOT,  <br /> :polkadot }}
  
Registrar 1:  <br />
**URL**: https://registrar.d11d.net/  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: Fom9M5W6Kck1hNAiE2mDcZ67auUCiNTzLBUdQy4QnxHSxdn,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1Reg2TYv9rGfrQKpPREmrHRxrNsUDBQKzkYwP1UstD97wpJ,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama: 0.65 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 10 DOT,  <br /> :polkadot }}
  
Registrar 2:  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: EK8veMNH6sVtvhSRo4q1ZRh6huCDm69gxK4eN5MFoZzo3G7,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1EpXirnoTimS1SWq52BeYx7sitsusXNGzMyGx8WPujPd1HB,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama: 1 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 0 DOT. :polkadot }}

{{ kusama: Registrar 3:  <br />
**Account**: GLiebiQp5f6G5vNcc7BgRE9T3hrZSYDwP6evERn3hEczdaM,  <br />
**Fee**: 1 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}

{{ kusama: Registrar 4:  <br />
**Account**: GhmpzxUyTVsFJhV7s2wNvD8v3Bgikb6WvYjj4QSuSScAUw6,  <br />
**Fee**: 0.04 KSM.  <br /> :kusama }}

To find out how to contact the registrar after the application for judgement or to learn who they
are, we can check their identity by adding them to our Address Book. Their identity will be
automatically loaded.

![Chevdor is registrar #1](../assets/identity/16.jpg)

## Sub Accounts

Users can also link accounts by setting "sub accounts", each with its own identity, under a primary
account. The system reserves a bond for each sub account. An example of how you might use this would
be a validation company running multiple validators. A single entity, "My Staking Company", could
register multiple sub accounts that represent the [Stash accounts](learn-keys.md) of each of their
validators.

An account can have a maximum of 100 sub-accounts. Note that a deposit of 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.subAccountDeposit" defaultValue={200530000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.subAccountDeposit" defaultValue={6666000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}
is required for every sub-account.

:::info Explainer article and video on setting sub-identities

Here is the [how to set sub-identities](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181991-how-to-set-identities-for-sub-accounts)
 article and a [video tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yh1JYg3ZKU) on setting sub-identities using
Polkadot-JS UI

:::


## Clearing and Killing an Identity

**Clearing:** Users can clear their identity information and have their deposit returned. Clearing
an identity also clears all sub accounts and returns their deposits.

To clear an identity:

1. Navigate to the [Accounts UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/accounts).
2. Click the three dots corresponding to the account you want to clear and select 'Set on-chain
   identity'.
3. Select 'Clear Identity', and sign and submit the transaction.

**Killing:** The Council can kill an identity that it deems erroneous. This results in a slash of
the deposit.

Commit message:

Added detailed info
Added small detail about known good identities

docs/learn/learn-identity.md, after:

---
id: learn-identity
title: Identity
sidebar_label: Identity
description: Learn about on-chain identity, judgements and registrars.
keywords: [identity, registrars, judgements]
slug: ../learn-identity
---
import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection"

{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} provides a naming system that allows 
participants to add personal information to their on-chain account and subsequently ask for verification 
of this information by [registrars](#registrars).

## Setting an Identity

Users can set an identity by registering through default fields such as legal name, display name,
website, Twitter handle, Riot handle, etc. along with some extra, custom fields for which they would
like attestations (see [Judgements](#judgements)).

Users must reserve funds in a bond to store their information on chain: 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={202580000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={33333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }} and 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.fieldDeposit" defaultValue={660000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.fieldDeposit" defaultValue={8333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}
per each field beyond the legal name.
These funds are *locked*, not spent - they are returned when the identity is cleared.

These amounts can also be extracted by querying constants through the
[Chain state constants](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/chainstate/constants) tab on
Polkadot-JS Apps.

:::info Instructions for setting and clearing Identities

The procedure to set and clear identities is explained in detail in this support article - 
[How to set and clear an Identity](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181981-how-to-set-and-clear-an-identity) 

:::

:::note 

The Ledger app doesn't support the extrinsic for setting identity yet. As a workaround, create a primary
identity with an on-chain account and then using that primary identity, assign a [sub-identity](#sub-accounts) 
to the Ledger stash.

:::

### Format Caveat

Please note the following caveat: because the fields support different formats, from raw bytes to
various hashes, a UI has no way of telling how to encode a given field it encounters. The Polkadot-JS
UI currently encodes the raw bytes it encounters as UTF8 strings, which makes these values readable
on-screen. However, given that there are no restrictions on the values that can be placed into these
fields, a different UI may interpret them as, for example, IPFS hashes or encoded bitmaps. This
means any field stored as raw bytes will become unreadable by that specific UI. As field standards
crystallize, things will become easier to use but for now, every custom implementation of displaying
user information will likely have to make a conscious decision on the approach to take, or support
multiple formats and then attempt multiple encodings until the output makes sense.


## Judgements

After a user injects their information on chain, they can request judgement from a registrar. Users
declare a maximum fee that they are willing to pay for judgement, and registrars whose fee is below
that amount can provide a judgement.

When a registrar provides judgement, they can select up to six levels of confidence in their
attestation:

- Unknown: The default value, no judgement made yet.
- Reasonable: The data appears reasonable, but no in-depth checks (e.g. formal KYC process) were
  performed (all the verified identities).
- Known Good: The registrar has certified that the information is correct (this step involves passport checks, and at the moment no account has known good identity, with the exception of registrars).
- Out of Date: The information used to be good, but is now out of date.
- Low Quality: The information is low quality or imprecise, but can be fixed with an update.
- Erroneous: The information is erroneous and may indicate malicious intent.

A seventh state, "fee paid", is for when a user has requested judgement and it is in progress.
Information that is in this state or "erroneous" is "sticky" and cannot be modified; it can only be
removed by the complete removal of the identity.

Registrars gain trust by performing proper due diligence and would presumably be replaced for
issuing faulty judgements.

To be judged after submitting your identity information, go to the
["Extrinsics UI"](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/extrinsics) and select the `identity` pallet, then
`requestJudgement`. For the `reg_index` put the index of the registrar you want to be judged by, and
for the `max_fee` put the maximum you're willing to pay for these confirmations.

If you don't know which registrar to pick, first check the available registrars by going to
["Chain State UI"](#) and selecting `identity.registrars()` to get the full list.

:::info Instructions for requesting and cancelling Identity judegements

The procedure to request and cancel identity judgements is explained in detail in this
[support article](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181990-how-to-request-and-cancel-identity-judgement)

:::

:::caution

The set identity calls go on-chain. Hence, the contact information is available publicly, for both legitimate entities, like registrars or validators, but also scammers who might impersonate them. The strings in the identity fields are good candidates for homograph attacks, as someone could list a fraudulent website (web3.f0undation instead of web3.foundation for example) and still get verified by the registrar (if the checks are automated)!

In a decentralized network, one should be cautious making transactions with accounts solely based on their identity. If an account on-chain claims to be of Web3 Foundation, it is wise to verify its authenticity by checking directly with Web3 Foundation or examining the established history of that account on-chain.

:::

## Registrars

Registrars can set a fee for their services and limit their attestation to certain fields. For
example, a registrar could charge {{ kusama: 0.1 KSM :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1 DOT :polkadot }} to 
verify one's legal name, email, and GPG key. When a user requests judgement, they will pay this fee 
to the registrar who provides the judgement on those claims. Users set a maximum fee they are willing 
to pay and only registrars below this amount would provide judgement.

### Becoming a Registrar

To become a registrar, submit a pre-image and proposal into
[Democracy](../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md), then wait for people to vote
on it. For best results, write a post about your identity and intentions beforehand, and once the
proposal is in the queue ask people to endorse it so that it gets ahead in the referendum queue.

Here's how to submit a proposal to become a registrar:

Go to the Democracy tab, select "Submit preimage", and input the information for this motion -
notably which account you're nominating to be a registrar in the `identity.setRegistrar` function.

![Setting a registrar](../assets/identity/12.jpg)

Copy the preimage hash. In the above image, that's
`0x90a1b2f648fc4eaff4f236b9af9ead77c89ecac953225c5fafb069d27b7131b7`. Submit the preimage by signing
a transaction.

Next, select "Submit Proposal" and enter the previously copied preimage hash. The `locked balance`
field needs to be at least 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={202580000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.basicDeposit" defaultValue={33333000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}. 
You can find out the minimum by querying the chain state under [Chain State](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/chainstate) -> Constants -> democracy -> minimumDeposit.

![Submitting a proposal](../assets/identity/13.jpg)

At this point, DOT holders can endorse the motion. With enough endorsements, the motion 
will become a referendum, which is then voted on. If it passes, users will be able to 
request judgement from this registrar.

### Current Registrars

There are multiple registrars on {{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}. 
Unless no additional information is available here, you must reach out to specific registrars 
individually if you want to be judged by those.

Registrar 0:  <br />
**URL**: https://registrar.web3.foundation/  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: H4XieK3r3dq3VEvRtqZR7wN7a1UEkXxf14orRsEfdFjmgkF,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 12j3Cz8qskCGJxmSJpVL2z2t3Fpmw3KoBaBaRGPnuibFc7o8,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama:  0.04 KSM  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 0 DOT,  <br /> :polkadot }}
  
Registrar 1:  <br />
**URL**: https://registrar.d11d.net/  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: Fom9M5W6Kck1hNAiE2mDcZ67auUCiNTzLBUdQy4QnxHSxdn,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1Reg2TYv9rGfrQKpPREmrHRxrNsUDBQKzkYwP1UstD97wpJ,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama: 0.65 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 10 DOT,  <br /> :polkadot }}
  
Registrar 2:  <br />
**Account**: {{ kusama: EK8veMNH6sVtvhSRo4q1ZRh6huCDm69gxK4eN5MFoZzo3G7,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 1EpXirnoTimS1SWq52BeYx7sitsusXNGzMyGx8WPujPd1HB,  <br /> :polkadot }}
**Fee**: {{ kusama: 1 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}{{ polkadot: 0 DOT. :polkadot }}

{{ kusama: Registrar 3:  <br />
**Account**: GLiebiQp5f6G5vNcc7BgRE9T3hrZSYDwP6evERn3hEczdaM,  <br />
**Fee**: 1 KSM,  <br /> :kusama }}

{{ kusama: Registrar 4:  <br />
**Account**: GhmpzxUyTVsFJhV7s2wNvD8v3Bgikb6WvYjj4QSuSScAUw6,  <br />
**Fee**: 0.04 KSM.  <br /> :kusama }}

To find out how to contact the registrar after the application for judgement or to learn who they
are, we can check their identity by adding them to our Address Book. Their identity will be
automatically loaded.

![Chevdor is registrar #1](../assets/identity/16.jpg)

## Sub Accounts

Users can also link accounts by setting "sub accounts", each with its own identity, under a primary
account. The system reserves a bond for each sub account. An example of how you might use this would
be a validation company running multiple validators. A single entity, "My Staking Company", could
register multiple sub accounts that represent the [Stash accounts](learn-keys.md) of each of their
validators.

An account can have a maximum of 100 sub-accounts. Note that a deposit of 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.identity.subAccountDeposit" defaultValue={200530000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.identity.subAccountDeposit" defaultValue={6666000000} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}
is required for every sub-account.

:::info Explainer article and video on setting sub-identities

Here is the [how to set sub-identities](https://support.polkadot.network/support/solutions/articles/65000181991-how-to-set-identities-for-sub-accounts)
 article and a [video tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Yh1JYg3ZKU) on setting sub-identities using
Polkadot-JS UI

:::


## Clearing and Killing an Identity

**Clearing:** Users can clear their identity information and have their deposit returned. Clearing
an identity also clears all sub accounts and returns their deposits.

To clear an identity:

1. Navigate to the [Accounts UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/accounts).
2. Click the three dots corresponding to the account you want to clear and select 'Set on-chain
   identity'.
3. Select 'Clear Identity', and sign and submit the transaction.

**Killing:** The Council can kill an identity that it deems erroneous. This results in a slash of
the deposit.
