docs/learn/learn-statemint.md, before:

---
id: learn-statemint
title: Statemint
sidebar_label: Statemint
description: Statemint and its features
slug: ../../learn-statemint
---

Statemint is a generic assets parachain which provides functionality for deploying and transferring
assets — both Fungible and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). It is a common good parachain on Polkadot
(not to be confused with [Statemine](https://guide.kusama.network/docs/kusama-statemine/), which is
a parachain on Kusama). The native token of Statemint is DOT. The Existential Deposit (ED), transfer fees,
and the deposits for proxy/multisig operations on Statemint are about 1/10th of the values on the Relay chain.
For example, the Existential Deposit of a Statemint account is 0.1 DOT, when compared to 1 DOT on Polkadot.
Apart from the core protocol token DOT, the assets held on Statemint can be broadly categorized as

- Assets backed by an on-chain protocol’s utility
- Assets with off-chain backing
- Assets without any backing

## Creating Assets on Statemint

:::info

Before minting assets on Statemint, we recommend that you try out this tutorial on Westmint, which
is a parachain on Westend. The WND tokens (Westies) are free and are available through a
[faucet](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#getting-westies).

:::

To create an asset on Statemint, you would need a deposit of 10 DOT and around 0.2 DOT for the metadata
. Before you create an asset on Statemint, ensure that your Statemint account balance is more 
than 10.3 DOT, which should seamlessly account for the required deposits and transaction fees. You can
send DOT from a Polkadot account to a Statemint account using the teleport functionality. For
instructions on teleporting DOT, check this [tutorial on Teleports](../learn/learn-teleport.md).

Assuming you have the required DOT balance on your Statemint account, the following instructions
should let you successfully create an asset on Statemint

- Access Statemint through Polkdot-JS Apps UI.
- Navigate to Network > Assets.

![Navigate to Assets page](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-0.png)

- Click on the create button and you will be presented with a pop-up window. Choose the creator
  account, name of the asset to be displayed on Statemint, the asset's symbol, number of decimals
  for the asset, the minimum balance required to hold this asset on a Statemint account and the most
  important field of your asset - the unique asset ID. The UI would not let you enter an ID that has
  already been taken. After all the details are entered, click on the next button.

![Add Asset Metadata](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-1.png)

- Choose the admin, issuer and the freezer accounts for your asset and click on the create button.

![Asset managing accounts](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-2.png)

- Sign and submit the transaction. (If you like to verify the transaction details before signing,
  you can click on the dropdown button pointed by the arrow in the snapshot below)

![Sign asset creating transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-3.png)

If the transaction is successful, you should see the asset and its details displayed in the
Network > Assets page on Statemint.

## Transferring Assets on Statemint

:::caution Beware of scams

Due to the permissionless nature of Statemint, anyone can create an asset with any name and symbol.
The most important attribute of an asset is the asset ID. There could be multiple assets with the
same name and symbol, but they cannot have the same asset ID.

:::

:::info

The assets can be Sufficient or Non-Sufficient. To hold a Non-Sufficient asset, the Statemint
account needs to exist on-chain. This is different from Ethereum where a non-existent account can
hold ERC-20 tokens. Ensure that the receiver account has at least 0.1 DOT which is the Existential
Deposit for a Statemint account. Although, there are a few exceptions to this - If an asset is
Sufficient or someone has placed a deposit for that account to hold the asset, the Existential
Deposit in DOT on the receiver account is not needed.

:::

To hold, send or receive most of the assets on Statemint (which are Non-Suffcient), the accounts
need to have a minimum balance of 0.1 DOT (The Existential Deposit on Statemint). You can send DOT
from a Polkadot account to a Statemint account using the teleport functionality. For instructions on
teleporting DOT, check this [tutorial on Teleports](learn-teleport.md). The balance transfers of DOT
on Statemint are similar to the balance transfers DOT on Polkadot and can be done on the accounts
page on Polkadot-JS Apps UI.

In this tutorial, transfer of JOEs (Asset ID: 8, Symbol: JOE) is demonstrated.

- Access Statemint through Polkdot-JS Apps UI.
- Navigate to Network > Assets and click on the Balances tab
- Select the asset to transfer from the drop-down (The assets are sorted based on their IDs). If you
  have accounts with the selected asset, they will be displayed.

![Finding the asset](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-1.png)

- Click on the send button
- Enter the receiver address and the amount to transfer.

![Asset transfer transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-2.png)

- Sign and submit the transaction

![Sign asset creating transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-3.png)

If the transaction is successful, the assets are transferred to the receiver account.

Commit message:

Add Statemine and Statemint RPC support (#3568)
* Add Statemine and Statemint RPC support

* Fetch statemint values RPC

* fetch values from Statemine RPC

* Add existential deposit info statemine

* Import React components

* minor fix

docs/learn/learn-statemint.md, after:

---
id: learn-statemint
title: Statemint
sidebar_label: Statemint
description: Statemint and its features
slug: ../../learn-statemint
---
import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection"

Statemint is a generic assets parachain which provides functionality for deploying and transferring
assets — both Fungible and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). It is a common good parachain on Polkadot
(not to be confused with [Statemine](https://guide.kusama.network/docs/kusama-statemine/), which is
a parachain on Kusama). The native token of Statemint is DOT. The Existential Deposit (ED), transfer fees,
and the deposits for proxy/multisig operations on Statemint are about 1/10th of the values on the Relay chain.
For example, the Existential Deposit of a Statemint account is <RPC network="statemint" path="consts.balances.existentialDeposit" defaultValue={1000000000} filter="humanReadable"/>, 
when compared to <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.balances.existentialDeposit" defaultValue={10000000000} filter="humanReadable"/>, on Polkadot.
Apart from the core protocol token DOT, the assets held on Statemint can be broadly categorized as

- Assets backed by an on-chain protocol’s utility
- Assets with off-chain backing
- Assets without any backing

## Creating Assets on Statemint

:::info

Before minting assets on Statemint, we recommend that you try out this tutorial on Westmint, which
is a parachain on Westend. The WND tokens (Westies) are free and are available through a
[faucet](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#getting-westies).

:::

To create an asset on Statemint, you would need a deposit of <RPC network="statemint" path="consts.assets.assetDeposit" defaultValue={100000000000} filter="humanReadable"/>
and around <RPC network="statemint" path="consts.assets.metadataDepositBase" defaultValue={2006800000} filter="humanReadable"/> for the metadata
. Before you create an asset on Statemint, ensure that your Statemint account balance is a bit more 
than the sum of those two deposits, which should seamlessly account for the required deposits and transaction fees. You can
send DOT from a Polkadot account to a Statemint account using the teleport functionality. For
instructions on teleporting DOT, check this [tutorial on Teleports](../learn/learn-teleport.md).

Assuming you have the required DOT balance on your Statemint account, the following instructions
should let you successfully create an asset on Statemint

- Access Statemint through Polkdot-JS Apps UI.
- Navigate to Network > Assets.

![Navigate to Assets page](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-0.png)

- Click on the create button and you will be presented with a pop-up window. Choose the creator
  account, name of the asset to be displayed on Statemint, the asset's symbol, number of decimals
  for the asset, the minimum balance required to hold this asset on a Statemint account and the most
  important field of your asset - the unique asset ID. The UI would not let you enter an ID that has
  already been taken. After all the details are entered, click on the next button.

![Add Asset Metadata](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-1.png)

- Choose the admin, issuer and the freezer accounts for your asset and click on the create button.

![Asset managing accounts](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-2.png)

- Sign and submit the transaction. (If you like to verify the transaction details before signing,
  you can click on the dropdown button pointed by the arrow in the snapshot below)

![Sign asset creating transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-3.png)

If the transaction is successful, you should see the asset and its details displayed in the
Network > Assets page on Statemint.

## Transferring Assets on Statemint

:::caution Beware of scams

Due to the permissionless nature of Statemint, anyone can create an asset with any name and symbol.
The most important attribute of an asset is the asset ID. There could be multiple assets with the
same name and symbol, but they cannot have the same asset ID.

:::

:::info

The assets can be Sufficient or Non-Sufficient. To hold a Non-Sufficient asset, the Statemint
account needs to exist on-chain. This is different from Ethereum where a non-existent account can
hold ERC-20 tokens. Ensure that the receiver account has at least 0.1 DOT which is the Existential
Deposit for a Statemint account. Although, there are a few exceptions to this - If an asset is
Sufficient or someone has placed a deposit for that account to hold the asset, the Existential
Deposit in DOT on the receiver account is not needed.

:::

To hold, send or receive most of the assets on Statemint (which are Non-Suffcient), the accounts
need to have a minimum balance of 0.1 DOT (The Existential Deposit on Statemint). You can send DOT
from a Polkadot account to a Statemint account using the teleport functionality. For instructions on
teleporting DOT, check this [tutorial on Teleports](learn-teleport.md). The balance transfers of DOT
on Statemint are similar to the balance transfers DOT on Polkadot and can be done on the accounts
page on Polkadot-JS Apps UI.

In this tutorial, transfer of JOEs (Asset ID: 8, Symbol: JOE) is demonstrated.

- Access Statemint through Polkdot-JS Apps UI.
- Navigate to Network > Assets and click on the Balances tab
- Select the asset to transfer from the drop-down (The assets are sorted based on their IDs). If you
  have accounts with the selected asset, they will be displayed.

![Finding the asset](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-1.png)

- Click on the send button
- Enter the receiver address and the amount to transfer.

![Asset transfer transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-2.png)

- Sign and submit the transaction

![Sign asset creating transaction](../assets/statemint/Statemint-asset-transfer-3.png)

If the transaction is successful, the assets are transferred to the receiver account.
