docs/learn/learn-staking-miner.md, before:

---
id: learn-staking-miner
title: Staking Miner
sidebar_label: Staking Miner
description: Learn about Phragmén optimization on-chain via staking miners
keywords: [staking, npos, miner, phragmén]
slug: ../learn-staking-miner
---

import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection";

:::caution

The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own
discretion, as there is a risk of losing some funds.

:::

The staking miner is a passive validator functionality which runs when a new set of validators need
to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners
compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake
distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Staking miners run
the any given staking algortihms(as of now, sequential Phragmén or PhragMMS, this is subject to
change if improved algorithms are introduced) to produce results, and the result is then sent as a
transaction to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a bond, and a
transaction fee. The best solution is rewarded which in the least covers the transaction fee, and
the bond is returned to the account. If the solution is not valid, the bond and the fee are lost.

Staking miner uses a pallet called `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` and can only produce
solutions during the
[`SignedPhase`](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html#signed-phase)
of the pallet's life cycle. Once the `SignedPhase` is over and the
[`UnsignedPhase`](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html#unsigned-phase)
starts, only the off-chain workers can provide election results.

Running the staking miner requires passing the seed of a funded account in order to pay the fees for
the transactions that will be sent. The same account's balance is used to reserve deposits as well.
The best solution in each round is rewarded. All correct solutions will get their bond back and the
ones that submit invalid solutions will lose their bond.

## NPoS election optimization

A basic election solution is a simple distribution of stake across validators, but this can be
optimized for better distribution equaling a higher security score. The staking miner does not act
as a validator and focuses solely on the election result and optimization of the solution. It
connects to a specified chain and keeps listening to new signed phase of the election pallet in
order to submit solutions to the NPoS election. When the correct time comes, it computes its
solution and submits it to the chain. The default miner algorithm is sequential Phragmén with a
configurable number of balancing iterations that improve the score.

![NPoS election optimization](../assets/staking-miner/NPoS-election-optimization.png)

## Signed Phase of the election pallet

The election provider pallet `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` is divided into two phases,
**signed** and **unsigned**. At the end of the pallet's timeline, the function `elect()` is called.

```
                                                                   elect()
                +   <--T::SignedPhase-->  +  <--T::UnsignedPhase-->   +
  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
   Phase::Off   +       Phase::Signed     +      Phase::Unsigned      +
```

Solutions provided by the staking miner can only be submitted during the signed phase. Solutions are
submitted and queued on the chain as a `RawSolution`. Once submitted, a solution cannot be retracted
by the originating account.

`RawSolution` struct definition:

```
pub struct RawSolution<S> {
    pub solution: S, // The solution itself
    pub score: ElectionScore, // The claimed score of the solution.
    pub round: u32, // The round at which this solution should be submitted.
}
```

A maximum of `pallet::Config::MaxSignedSubmissions` will be stored on-chain and they will be sorted
based on score. Higher the score the more optimal the election solution is. On both Polkadot and
Kusama the
['MaxSignedSubmissions'](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/blob/master/runtime/polkadot/src/lib.rs#L446)
is set to
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedMaxSubmissions" defaultValue={16}/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedMaxSubmissions" defaultValue={16}/> :kusama }}
submissions. This variable can be modified if needed through governance.

Upon arrival of a new solution:

1. If the queue is not full, it is stored in the appropriate sorted index.
2. If the queue is full but the submitted solution is better than one of the queued ones, the worse
   solution is discarded, the bond of the outgoing solution is returned, and the new solution is
   stored in the correct index.
3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones,
   it is instantly rejected and no bond is reserved.

Upon the end of the signed phase, no more solutions can be submitted and the solutions in the queue
will be checked using
[`Pallet::feasibility_check`](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/pallet/struct.Pallet.html#method.feasibility_check)
which ensures the score is indeed correct, and marks them as valid or invalid. By checking each
solution in the queue, the queue will be reorganized by score. The highest valid score will be
rewarded. Invalid solutions with higher score than the winning solution will be slashed. The rest of
the solutions will be discarded and their deposit will be returned.

```
Queue
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=20, valid=false)| +-->  Slashed
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=15, valid=true )| +-->  Rewarded, Saved
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=10, valid=true )| +-->  Discarded
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=05, valid=false)| +-->  Discarded
+-------------------------------+
|             None              |
+-------------------------------+
```

If you want to run a staking miner on your validator, refer to the repository provided in the
resources section below.

## Further Resources

- [Election Pallet definition](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html)
- [Staking Miner repository](https://github.com/paritytech/staking-miner-v2)

Commit message:

Use deposit instead of bond in wording, and add a draft section for deposit and reward mechanics

docs/learn/learn-staking-miner.md, after:

---
id: learn-staking-miner
title: Staking Miner
sidebar_label: Staking Miner
description: Learn about Phragmén optimization on-chain via staking miners
keywords: [staking, npos, miner, phragmén]
slug: ../learn-staking-miner
---

import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection";

:::caution

The staking-miner code is experimental and it is still in development phase. Use is at your own
discretion, as there is a risk of losing some funds.

:::

The staking miner is a passive validator functionality which runs when a new set of validators need
to be elected for NPoS. This is a computationally intense process, hence the mining. Staking miners
compete with each other to produce election solutions which consist of a validator set, stake
distribution across that set, and a score indicating how optimal the solution is. Staking miners run
the any given staking algortihms(as of now, sequential Phragmén or PhragMMS, this is subject to
change if improved algorithms are introduced) to produce results, and the result is then sent as a
transaction to the relay chain via a normal signed extrinsic. The transaction requires a deposit,
and a transaction fee. The best solution is rewarded which in the least covers the transaction fee,
and the deposit is returned to the account. If the solution is not valid, the
[deposit and the fee](learn-staking-miner#deposit-and-reward-mechanics) are lost.

Staking miner uses a pallet called `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` and can only produce
solutions during the
[`SignedPhase`](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html#signed-phase)
of the pallet's life cycle. Once the `SignedPhase` is over and the
[`UnsignedPhase`](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html#unsigned-phase)
starts, only the off-chain workers can provide election results.

Running the staking miner requires passing the seed of a funded account in order to pay the fees for
the transactions that will be sent. The same account's balance is used to reserve deposits as well.
The best solution in each round is rewarded. All correct solutions will get their deposit back and
the ones that submit invalid solutions will lose their deposit.

## NPoS election optimization

A basic election solution is a simple distribution of stake across validators, but this can be
optimized for better distribution equaling a higher security score. The staking miner does not act
as a validator and focuses solely on the election result and optimization of the solution. It
connects to a specified chain and keeps listening to new signed phase of the election pallet in
order to submit solutions to the NPoS election. When the correct time comes, it computes its
solution and submits it to the chain. The default miner algorithm is sequential Phragmén with a
configurable number of balancing iterations that improve the score.

## Deposit and reward mechanics

Current deposit base is
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedDepositBase" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedDepositBase" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}

Current deposit per KB of solution data is
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedDepositByte" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedDepositByte" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}

Current rewards is
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedRewardBase" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedRewardBase" defaultValue={16} filter="humanReadable"/> :kusama }}

![NPoS election optimization](../assets/staking-miner/NPoS-election-optimization.png)

## Signed Phase of the election pallet

The election provider pallet `pallet_election_provider_multi_phase` is divided into two phases,
**signed** and **unsigned**. At the end of the pallet's timeline, the function `elect()` is called.

```
                                                                   elect()
                +   <--T::SignedPhase-->  +  <--T::UnsignedPhase-->   +
  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
   Phase::Off   +       Phase::Signed     +      Phase::Unsigned      +
```

Solutions provided by the staking miner can only be submitted during the signed phase. Solutions are
submitted and queued on the chain as a `RawSolution`. Once submitted, a solution cannot be retracted
by the originating account.

`RawSolution` struct definition:

```
pub struct RawSolution<S> {
    pub solution: S, // The solution itself
    pub score: ElectionScore, // The claimed score of the solution.
    pub round: u32, // The round at which this solution should be submitted.
}
```

A maximum of `pallet::Config::MaxSignedSubmissions` will be stored on-chain and they will be sorted
based on score. Higher the score the more optimal the election solution is. On both Polkadot and
Kusama the
['MaxSignedSubmissions'](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/blob/master/runtime/polkadot/src/lib.rs#L446)
is set to
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedMaxSubmissions" defaultValue={16}/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.signedMaxSubmissions" defaultValue={16}/> :kusama }}
submissions. This variable can be modified if needed through governance.

Upon arrival of a new solution:

1. If the queue is not full, it is stored in the appropriate sorted index.
2. If the queue is full but the submitted solution is better than one of the queued ones, the worse
   solution is discarded, the deposit of the outgoing solution is returned, and the new solution is
   stored in the correct index.
3. If the queue is full and the solution is not an improvement compared to any of the queued ones,
   it is instantly rejected and no deposit is reserved.

Upon the end of the signed phase, no more solutions can be submitted and the solutions in the queue
will be checked using
[`Pallet::feasibility_check`](https://paritytech.github.io/substrate/master/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/pallet/struct.Pallet.html#method.feasibility_check)
which ensures the score is indeed correct, and marks them as valid or invalid. By checking each
solution in the queue, the queue will be reorganized by score. The highest valid score will be
rewarded. Invalid solutions with higher score than the winning solution will be slashed. The rest of
the solutions will be discarded and their deposit will be returned.

```
Queue
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=20, valid=false)| +-->  Slashed
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=15, valid=true )| +-->  Rewarded, Saved
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=10, valid=true )| +-->  Discarded
+-------------------------------+
|Solution(score=05, valid=false)| +-->  Discarded
+-------------------------------+
|             None              |
+-------------------------------+
```

If you want to run a staking miner on your validator, refer to the repository provided in the
resources section below.

## Further Resources

- [Election Pallet definition](https://crates.parity.io/pallet_election_provider_multi_phase/index.html)
- [Staking Miner repository](https://github.com/paritytech/staking-miner-v2)
