docs/learn/learn-collator.md, before:

---
id: learn-collator
title: Collator
sidebar_label: Collator
description: Learn about how collators maintain the network.
keywords: [collator, maintain, full node, block candidate]
slug: ../learn-collator
---

Collators maintain parachains by collecting parachain transactions from users and producing state
transition proofs for Relay Chain validators. In other words, collators maintain parachains by
aggregating parachain transactions into parachain block candidates and producing state transition
proofs for validators based on those blocks.

Collators maintain a full node for the Relay Chain and a full node for their particular parachain;
meaning they retain all necessary information to be able to author new blocks and execute
transactions in much the same way as miners do on current PoW blockchains. Under normal
circumstances, they will collate and execute transactions to create an unsealed block and provide
it, together with a proof of state transition, to one or more validators responsible for proposing a
parachain block.

Unlike validators, collator nodes do not secure the network. If a parachain block is invalid, it
will get rejected by validators. The validators are required to check the validity of submitted
candidates, followed by issuing and collecting statements about the validity of candidates to other
validators. This process is known as **candidate backing**. Validators receive an
arbitrary number of parachain candidates with associated proofs from untrusted collators. A
candidate is considered backable when at least 2/3 of all assigned validators have issued a valid
statement about that candidate.

The validator must successfully verify the following conditions in the following order:

1. The candidate does not exceed any parameters in the persisted validation data.

2. The signature of the collator is valid.

3. Validate the candidate by executing the parachain Runtime.

Once a candidate meets a specified criteria for inclusion, the selected relay chain block author
then choses any of the backed candidates for each parachain and includes those into the relay chain
block.

The assumption that having more collators is better or more secure is not correct. On the contrary,
too many collators may slow down the network. The only nefarious power collators have is transaction
censorship. To prevent censorship, a parachain only needs to ensure that there are some neutral
collators - but not necessarily a majority. Theoretically, the censorship problem is solved with
having just one honest collator.

## XCM

Collators are a key element of the [XCM (Cross-Consensus Message Passing Format)](learn-xcm.md). By
being full nodes of the Relay Chain, they are all aware of each other as peers. This makes it
possible for them to send messages from parachain A to parachain B.

## Taking the Case for One Parachain

A start of a new block candidate is initiated with a block creation time. The collator aggregates
all new transactions at the end of the process. When doing so, the collator signs the _parachain
block candidate_ and produces state transition proofs, which are a summary of the final account
balances caused by the transactions in the candidate block. The collator relays the candidate block
and state transition proofs to the validators on-chain. The validators verify the transactions
within the parachain block candidate. Upon verification, and if all is well, the validator shares
the candidate block with the Relay Chain.

Parachain block candidates are collected together and a _Relay Chain block candidate_ is produced.

![parachain candidate block diagram](../assets/polkadot-consensus-example-1.png)

The validators on the network will try to reach a consensus on the Relay Chain block candidate. Upon
reaching consensus, the now validated Relay Chain block candidate is shared with the validators and
collators, and the process repeats for new transactions. A collator cannot continue building blocks
on a parachain until the block candidate they proposed to the Relay Chain validators have been
validated.

![Relay Chain candidate block diagram](../assets/polkadot-consensus-example-2.png)

A block is produced every 6 seconds.

## Collators in the Wild

Blockchains that are built using Substrate are unable to hook onto the Relay Chain on their own. The
Parity team built the [Cumulus library](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus/) to address this.
Collators are being used on the
[Rococo](../build/build-parachains.md##testing-a-parachains:-rococo-testnet) testnet, and you can
learn more about how they are used with Cumulus via the
[Cumulus](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus/) repository. More information can be found under
the [Cumulus section](../build/build-parachains.md###cumulus) on the build parachain page.

## Guides and Tools

- [Tutorial covering Cumulus and Collators](https://docs.substrate.io/tutorials/connect-other-chains/)
- [Rococo testnet guide](../build/build-parachains.md##testing-a-parachains:-rococo-testnet)
- [polkadot-launch](https://github.com/shawntabrizi/polkadot-launch) - a tool to quickly spin up a
  local Polkadot testnet based on some parameters like number of parachains, collator setup, etc.

Commit message:

Additions Parachains Host Implementers Guide (#4200)
* Added info to validators page

* Added more info about approval process

* added info about disputes

* More clarity in the text

* Removed figure

- removed from text
- added to _legacy
- reason: does not reflects what is explained in the Guide, plus goes beyond what collators can do

* spell checks

* Added more context about parablocks

* More text for Approval process

- minor edits
- added two process stages

* added more details approval process

- and links to parity's docs

* Moved links to parity's doc

- to the end of the md doc

* more text for approval checks

* Moved AnV page

- from "advanced" to "parachains"

* Minor edits to collators' role

* added disputes section

* More additions to disputes

* added chain selection section

* Added info about parachain architecture

* added info about runtime

* added link vmp

* added link xcmp

* added subsystems

- links to parity's doc

* Update docs/learn/learn-parachains.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-parachains.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* Update docs/learn/learn-validator.md

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

* minor edits

- run prettier
- minor edit

* Removed links for doc bottom

- added within the text
- prettified

Co-authored-by: Keith Alfaro <keith4895@gmail.com>

docs/learn/learn-collator.md, after:

---
id: learn-collator
title: Collator
sidebar_label: Collator
description: Learn about how collators maintain the network.
keywords: [collator, maintain, full node, block candidate]
slug: ../learn-collator
---

## Collators' Role

Collators maintain parachains by collecting parachain transactions from users and producing state
transition proofs for Relay Chain validators. In other words, collators maintain parachains by
aggregating parachain transactions into parachain block candidates and producing state transition
proofs (Proof-of-Validity, PoV) for validators.

Collators maintain a full node for the Relay Chain and a full node for their particular parachain;
meaning they retain all necessary information to be able to author new blocks and execute
transactions in much the same way as miners do on PoW blockchains. Under normal circumstances, they
will collate and execute transactions to create an unsealed block and provide it, together with a
PoV, to one or more validators responsible for proposing a parachain block.

Collators are similar to validators on any other blockchain but they do not need to provide security
guarantees because {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} provides those. If
a parachain block is invalid, it will get rejected by validators. The validators are required to
check the validity of submitted candidates, followed by issuing and collecting statements about the
validity of candidates to other validators. This process is known as **candidate backing**.
Validators receive an arbitrary number of parachain candidates with associated PoV from untrusted
collators. A candidate is considered _backable_ when at least 2/3 of all assigned validators have
issued a valid statement about that candidate.

The validator must successfully verify the following conditions in the following order:

1. The candidate does not exceed any parameters in the persisted validation data.

2. The signature of the collator is valid.

3. Validate the candidate by executing the parachain Runtime.

Once a candidate meets a specified criteria for inclusion, the selected relay chain block author
then choses any of the backable candidates for each parachain and includes those into the relay
chain block. We say the candidate blocks are _backed_.

The assumption that having more collators is better or more secure is not correct. On the contrary,
too many collators may slow down the network. The only nefarious power collators have is transaction
censorship. To prevent censorship, a parachain only needs to ensure that there are some neutral
collators - but not necessarily a majority. Theoretically, the censorship problem is solved with
having just one honest collator.

## XCM

Collators are a key element of the [XCM (Cross-Consensus Message Passing Format)](learn-xcm.md). By
being full nodes of the Relay Chain, they are all aware of each other as peers. This makes it
possible for them to send messages from parachain A to parachain B.

## Taking the Case for One Parachain

A start of a new block candidate is initiated with a block creation time. The collator aggregates
all new transactions at the end of the process. When doing so, the collator signs the _parachain
block candidate_ and produces state transition proofs (Proof-of-Validity, PoV), which are a summary
of the final account balances caused by the transactions in the candidate block. The collator sends
the candidate block and PoV to the parachain validators, so-called para-validators. The
para-validators verify the transactions within the parachain block candidate. Upon verification, and
if all is well, the candidate becomes _backable_ and a para-validator shares the candidate block
with the relay chain.

![parachain candidate block diagram](../assets/polkadot-consensus-example-1.png)

The validators on the relay chain will try to reach a consensus on the block candidate. Upon
reaching consensus, the now validated block candidate is shared with the validators and collators,
and the process repeats for new transactions. A collator cannot continue building blocks on a
parachain until the block candidate they proposed to the Relay Chain validators have been validated.
A block is produced every 6 seconds.

## Collators in the Wild

Blockchains that are built using Substrate are unable to hook onto the Relay Chain on their own. The
Parity team built the [Cumulus library](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus/) to address this.
Collators are being used on the
[Rococo](../build/build-parachains.md##testing-a-parachains:-rococo-testnet) testnet, and you can
learn more about how they are used with Cumulus via the
[Cumulus](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus/) repository. More information can be found under
the [Cumulus section](../build/build-parachains.md###cumulus) on the build parachain page.

## Guides and Tools

- [Tutorial covering Cumulus and Collators](https://docs.substrate.io/tutorials/connect-other-chains/)
- [Rococo testnet guide](../build/build-parachains.md##testing-a-parachains:-rococo-testnet)
- [polkadot-launch](https://github.com/shawntabrizi/polkadot-launch) - a tool to quickly spin up a
  local Polkadot testnet based on some parameters like number of parachains, collator setup, etc.
