---
id: learn-accounts
title: Polkadot Accounts
sidebar_label: Polkadot Accounts
description: An explanation of accounts, indices, identity, and reaping.
keywords: [account, polkadot account, polkadotjs, indices, identity, reaping]
slug: ../learn-accounts
---

import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection";

This document covers the basics of Polkadot and Kusama account addresses. For a more in-depth explanation of the cryptography behind them, please see
[the cryptography page](learn-cryptography.md).

## Address

An address is the public part of a Polkadot account. The private part is the key used to access this
address. The public and private parts together make up a Polkadot account. You can think of the
public address of your account like your mailbox and the private key like the key to open that
mailbox. Anybody can send mail to your mailbox, but only you can access them as only you have access
to its key. In the context of Polkadot accounts, anybody can send tokens to your public address but
only you can transact with them using your private key. That is why you should keep your private key
secret.

### Address Generation

A valid account requires a private key that can sign on to one of the
[supported curves and signature schemes](../build/build-protocol-info.md#cryptography).

Most wallets take many steps from a mnemonic phrase to an account key, which affects the ability to
use the same mnemonic phrase in multiple wallets. Wallets that use different measures will arrive at
a different set of addresses from the exact mnemonic phrase.

Most wallets generate a mnemonic phrase for users to back up their wallets and generate a private
key from the mnemonic. Not all wallets use the same algorithm to convert from mnemonic phrase to
private key.

A typical mnemonic phrase generated by
[the Subkey tool](https://docs.substrate.io/reference/command-line-tools/subkey/) is shown below.

```
'caution juice atom organ advance problem want pledge someone senior holiday very'
```

Its corresponding _private/public keypair_ is also shown.

```
Secret seed (Private key): 0x056a6a4e203766ffbea3146967ef25e9daf677b14dc6f6ed8919b1983c9bebbc
Public key (SS58): 5F3sa2TJAWMqDhXG6jhV4N8ko9SxwGy8TpaNS1repo5EYjQX
```

Subkey and Polkadot-JS based wallets use the BIP39 dictionary for mnemonic generation, but use the
entropy byte array to generate the private key, while full BIP39 wallets (like Ledger) use 2048
rounds of PBKDF2 on the mnemonic. The same mnemonic may generate different private keys on other
wallets due to the various cryptographic algorithms used.

See [Substrate BIP39 Repo](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-bip39) for more information.

### Address Format

The address format used in Substrate-based chains is SS58. SS58 is a modification of Base-58-check
from Bitcoin with some minor changes. Notably, the format contains an _address type_ prefix that
identifies an address as belonging to a specific network.

For example:

- Polkadot addresses **always start with** the number **1**.
- Kusama addresses always start with a capital letter, such as **C D, F, G, H, J**.
- Generic Substrate addresses **always start with** the number **5**.

These prefixes, including how to validate addresses, are embedded in the Substrate SS58 format.
Never use regular expressions for address validation.

It's important to understand that different network formats are **merely other representations of
the same public key in a private-public keypair** generated by an address generation tool. As a
result, the addresses across Substrate-based chains are compatible as long as the format is
converted correctly.

As of Runtime 28, the default [address format](learn-accounts.md##address-format) is the
[`MultiAddress`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/primitives/runtime/src/multiaddress.rs)
type.

This `enum` is a multi-format address wrapper for on-chain accounts and allows us to describe
Polkadot's default address format to represent many different address types. This includes **20
byte**, **32 byte**, and **arbitrary raw byte** variants. It also allows an enhancement to the
original [`indices`](learn-accounts.md#indices) lookup.

:::info

Many wallets allow you to convert between formats. Stand-alone tools exist as well; you can find
them in the [address conversion tools](#address-conversion-tools) section.

:::


### Obtaining and Managing an Address

The **most user-friendly** way to create a Polkadot or Kusama address is through the
[Polkadot-JS UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/accounts). Remember to back up the seed phrase used
to generate your account - the accounts are stored only in your browser, so purging the cache will
wipe your accounts as well. You would then have to recreate them using the seed phrase given to you
by the UI - this will also restore all your previously held balances.

A **more convenient and recommended** method of keeping the accounts stored on your computer is
using the [Polkadot{.js} extension](https://github.com/polkadot-js/extension). This extension
remembers your accounts and allows you to clear your browser cache without fear. Still, don't forget
to back up your seed phrase - if you lose access to this computer or the extension somehow crashes
beyond repair, the phrase will come in handy.

Please note that as this keeps your accounts in the browser, it is not safe to keep significant
holdings. By definition, a browser is a "hot wallet" and susceptible to a wide range of attacks, so
keep your funds in cold storage when dealing with non-trivial amounts. For improved security, you
can securely stash away the seed phrase for your accounts and remove all traces of the accounts from
your computer after creating them.

Besides the extension and the default UI, Polkadot and Kusama addresses can also be created with the
[Subkey tool](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/bin/utils/subkey). Subkey is
intended for users comfortable with using the command line and can seem intimidating but is quite
approachable. Follow the instructions in the
[Subkey documentation](https://docs.substrate.io/reference/command-line-tools/subkey/). When used
properly, Subkey is the **most secure** available method of creating an account.

There is also the very secure [Parity Signer](https://www.parity.io/signer/). This keeps your keys
on an air-gapped mobile phone. However, it does require obtaining an old Android or iOS-compatible
phone that you are comfortable using only for Parity Signer.

Hardware wallet integration is possible with Ledger. A full guide is available
[here](../general/ledger.md).

Alternatively, you might find other wallets on the [Wallet](../build/build-wallets.md) page, but
bear in mind that some of these are **unaudited** and are not officially affiliated with Web3
Foundation or the Polkadot project unless otherwise stated.

## Account Balance Types

On Polkadot, **four different balance types** indicate whether your balance can be used for
transfers, to pay fees, or must remain frozen and unused due to an on-chain requirement.

The `AccountData` struct defines the balance types in Substrate. The four types of balances include
`free`, `reserved`, `misc_frozen` (`miscFrozen` in camel-case), and `fee_frozen` (`feeFrozen` in
camel-case).

In general, the **usable** balance of the account is the amount that is `free` minus any funds that
are considered frozen (either `misc_frozen` or `fee_frozen`) and depend on the reason for which the
funds are to be used. If the funds are to be used for transfers, then the usable amount is the
_free_ amount minus any `misc_frozen` funds. However, if the funds are to be used to pay transaction
fees, the usable amount would be the _free_ funds minus `fee_frozen`.

The **total** balance of the account is considered to be the sum of `free` and `reserved` funds in
the account. Reserved funds are held due to on-chain requirements and can usually be freed by taking
some on-chain action. For example, the "Identity" pallet reserves funds while an on-chain identity
is registered, but by clearing the identity, you can unreserve the funds and make them free again.

## Existential Deposit and Reaping

When you generate an account (address), you only generate a _key_ that lets you access it. The
account does not exist yet on-chain. For that, it needs the existential deposit: 0.0000333333 KSM
(on Kusama) or 1 DOT (on Polkadot mainnet).

Having an account go below the existential deposit causes that account to be _reaped_. The account
will be wiped from the blockchain's state to conserve space, along with any funds in that address.
You do not lose access to the reaped address - as long as you have your private key or recovery
phrase, you can still use the address - but it needs a top-up of another existential deposit to be
able to interact with the chain.

Transaction fees cannot cause an account to be reaped. Since fees are deducted from the account
before any other transaction logic, accounts with balances _equal to_ the existential deposit cannot
construct a valid transaction. Additional funds will need to be added to cover the transaction fees.

Here's another way to think about existential deposits. Ever notice those `Thumbs.db` files on
Windows or `.DS_Store` files on Mac? Those are junk; they serve no specific purpose other than
making previews a bit faster. If a folder is empty saved for such a file, you can remove the folder
to clear the junk off your hard drive. That does not mean you lose access to this folder forever -
you can always recreate it. You have the _key_, after all - you're the computer's owner. It just
means you want to keep your computer clean until you maybe end up needing this folder again and then
recreate it. Your address is like this folder - it gets removed from the chain when nothing is in it
but gets put back when it has the existential deposit.

## Account Identity

The [Identities pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/frame/identity) built
into Polkadot allows users to attach on-chain metadata to their accounts. Independent registrars can
verify this metadata to provide trustworthiness. To learn more about how to set or release an
identity, how to define sub-accounts, or how to become a registrar, please read
[this guide](learn-identity.md).

## Proxy Accounts

Polkadot comes with a generalized proxy account system that allows users to keep keys in cold
storage while proxies act on their behalf with restricted (or unrestricted) functionality. See the
[proxies](learn-proxies.md) page for more information.

## Multi-signature Accounts

Multi-signature accounts are accounts created from several standard accounts (or even other
multi-sig accounts). For a full explanation, please see the
[Accounts Explainer section on multi-sigs](learn-accounts.md#multi-signature-accounts).

## Resources

- [Understanding Accounts and Keys in Polkadot](https://www.crowdcast.io/e/polkadot-keys) - An
  explanation of what the different kinds of accounts and keys are used for in Polkadot, with Bill
  Laboon and Chinmay Patel of BlockX Labs.
