docs/learn/learn-nomination-pools.md, before:

---
id: learn-nomination-pools
title: Nomination Pools
sidebar_label: Nomination Pools
description: Learn about Nomination Pools and their features
keyword: [nominate, nominator, stake, staking, pools]
slug: ../learn-nomination-pools
---

:::info Nomination Pools are live on [Westend](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Fwestend-rpc.polkadot.io#/staking/pools) and [Kusama](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Fkusama-rpc.polkadot.io#/staking/pools).

Get some [Westies (WND)](learn-DOT.md#getting-westies) and start experimenting with Nomination
pools! Soon they will be deployed on Polkadot.

:::

:::tip Have questions on Nomination Pools?

If you have questions about nomination pools, please join our
[nomination pools support channel](https://matrix.to/#/#nompools-support:matrix.parity.io).

:::

![Nomination Pools](../assets/staking/NPoS-Pools.png)

[Nomination pools](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/10694) are one of the key
(experimental) features from the roadmap of
[Staking improvements](https://gist.github.com/kianenigma/aa835946455b9a3f167821b9d05ba376) on
Polkadot. They are designed to permissionlessly allow members to pool their funds together and act
as a single nominator account. Due to the current runtime constraints, Polkadot can only handle
{{ max_active_nominator_count }} nominators comfortably in the
[electing set](learn-nominator.md#staking-election-stages). As one of the objectives of the
[NPoS algorithm](learn-phragmen.md) is to maximize the overall stake on the network, it can be
inferred that the staking system on Polkadot favors nominators with a larger stake. Only the
nominator accounts which back the Validators in the active set are eligible for receiving staking
rewards. This leaves out nomination intents from the accounts with lower DOT balance than the
min-active nomination and places them in a waiting queue to enter electing set. Nomination pools
will be handy to the members who would like to participate in the staking system with a stake much
lower than the dynamic min-active nomination threshold on the network. All operations are constant
space and time complexity relative to the number of members, eliminating any theoretical upper bound
on the quantity of members the system can handle and thus scaling the number of accounts that can
participate and earn rewards in the staking system on Polkadot. In summary, each nomination pool is
viewed as a single nominator from the NPoS system point of view.

:::info Why aren't the members in the nomination pools called delegators?

The term `delegator` is associated too much with Delegated Proof of Staking (DPoS) and since
Polkadot implements Nominated Proof of Staking (NPoS), naming them as delegators would be
misleading. `member` is our generic replacement for `delegator`. In action, members are actually
quite similar to delegators and do delegate their nomination power to the pool.

:::

The earnings of the pool are split pro rata to a member's stake in the bonded pool (and thus the
staking rewards for members will be the same as if they were a nominator). Importantly, slashes are
also applied proportionally to members who may have been actively bonded when a validator committed
a slashable offence.

## Key Components of Nomination Pools

- Bonded Pool: Tracks the distribution of actively staked funds.
- Reward Pool: Tracks rewards earned by actively staked funds.
- Unbonding Sub Pools: Collection of pools at different phases (i.e. eras) of the unbonding
  lifecycle.
- Members: Accounts that nominate to the pools.
- Point: A unit of measure for a member’s portion of a pool's funds. All pools start with a point to
  Planck ratio of 1. Over time, if the pool receives rewards, they increase in value, and if the
  pool is slashed, it decreases in value.

## Pool Member Lifecycle

### Join a pool

A member delegates funds to a pool by transferring some amount to the pool’s bonded account with the
`join` extrinsic. The pool then increases its bond with the new funds. A member is afforded the
ability to bond additional funds, or re-stake rewards as long as they are already actively bonded.
Note that a member may only belong to one pool at a time.

:::info

The funds nominated to a pool will not be visible in the member's account balance on Polkadot JS
Apps UI. This is because the member funds are transferred from their account to the pool's account.
This pool account is not accessible by anyone (including the pool root or depositor) and only the
pool's internal logic can access the account.

:::

Navigate to Network > Staking > Pools page on Polkadot JS Apps UI and choose the pool to join. Click
on the Join button and then sign and submit the transaction specifying the amount you would like to
nominate.

![Join Pool](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-3.png)

![Join Pool](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-4.png)

### Claim rewards

The member can claim their portion of any rewards that have accumulated since the previous time they
claimed (or in the case that they have never claimed, any rewards that have accumulated since the
era after they joined). Rewards are split pro rata among the actively bonded members.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled, where you can view your
pooled member account details. To claim rewards, click on the three vertical dots and click on
Withdraw claimable.

![Claim rewards](../assets/staking/nomination-pools-claim.png)

### Unbond funds

At any point in time after joining the pool, a member can start the process of exiting by unbonding.
`unbond` will unbond part or all of the member's funds.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled and click on the three
vertical dots and click on Unbond funds.

### Withdraw unbonded funds

After `unbond` has been called and the unbonding duration has passed (e.g. 28 days on Polkadot), a
member may withdraw their funds with `withdrawUnbonded`. Withdrawing effectively ends a member's
relationship with their pool, allowing them to join a different pool if desired.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled and click on the three
vertical dots and click on Withdraw unbonded.

### Limitations

- A member cannot vote (e.g. in Referenda or for Council members) with their nominated funds. This
  may be changed in the future once accounts are afforded the ability to split votes.
- In order for a member to switch pools they must wait for the normal 28 day unbonding process.
- A member can partially unbond the staked funds in the pool (at most 16 partial unbonds).

## Pool Administration

### States

- Open: The pool is open to be joined by anyone.
- Blocked: The pool is blocked; no joiners are permitted.
- Destroying: The pool is in the process of being destroyed. Once in this state the pool may never
  revert to any other state; it can only proceed to being destroyed. All members can be
  permissionlessly unbonded; this allows the pool to be dismantled regardless of any individual
  member’s proactivity.

### Roles:

- Depositor: Creates the pool and is the initial member. The depositor can only leave the pool once
  all other members have left. Once they leave by withdrawing, the pool is fully removed from the
  system.
- Nominator: Can select the validators the pool nominates.
- State-Toggler: Can change the pool’s state and kick (permissionlessly unbond/withdraw) members if
  the pool is blocked.
- Root: Can change the nominator, state-toggler, or itself. Further, it can perform any of the
  actions the nominator or state-toggler can.

## Pool Lifecycle

### Creation

The depositor calls the `create` extrinsic, setting the administrative roles and transferring some
funds to the pool in order to add themselves as the first member. As stated above, the depositor
must always be a member as long as the pool exists; they will be the last member to leave, ensuring
they always have some skin in the game. Significant stake from the depositor is always a good
indicator for the pool's credibility. The pool’s ‘nominator role’ selects validators with the
nominate extrinsic. On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Pools and click on Add
Pool button.

![Create Nomination Pools](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-1.png)

The UI automatically assigns ID to the pool and allows for entering the name of the pools as well as
the deposit to be bonded.

![Create Nomination Pools - deposit](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-2.png)

When creating a pool using Polkadot JS Apps UI, all the roles are mapped to the Depositor account by
default. If any of these roles need to be assigned to a different account, create the pool using
`create` extrinsic available on Developer > Extrinsics > nominationPools on Polkadot JS Apps UI.

![Nomination Pool Roles](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-7.png)

### Upkeep

The `nominator` can update the pool’s validator selection. On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to
Network > Staking > Accounts page and click on Pooled button.If you have any pooled accounts with
the role of `nominator`, you would notice the option to set nominees. Select the validators to
nominate like you would normally using a nominator account.

![Nominate validators](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-5.png)

The `state-toggler` can update the pool’s state to blocked through `setState` extrinsic and then
kick members by calling `unbond` and `withdrawUnbonded`. (The state can also be toggled back to
open).

### Destruction

A pool can be pushed into the “destroying” state via one of:

- The state-toggler sets the pool to “destroying”.
- Any account can set the pool to destroying if over 90% of the pool's active bonded balance has
  been slashed. Dismantling a destroying pool
- When a pool is in ‘destroying’ state, `unbond` and `withdrawUnbonded` become permissionless, so
  anyone can help all the members exit.
- Once the depositor withdraws, no members belong to the pool, and all the pool’s resources are
  wiped from state.

## Slashing

If a pool’s underlying nomination account is slashed by the staking system, then the slash is
distributed evenly across the bonded pool and the unbonding pools from slash era+1 through the slash
apply era. Thus, any member who either a) was unbonding or b) was actively bonded in the
aforementioned range of eras will be affected by the slash. In other words, a member who may have
been actively bonded during the offence is slashed pro rata based on its stake relative to the total
slash amount.

Unbonding pools need to be slashed to ensure all nominators who were in the bonded pool while it was
backing a validator that committed an offence are punished. Without these measures a nominator could
unbond right after a validator equivocated with no consequences.

This strategy is unfair to members who joined after the slash, because they get slashed as well, but
spares members who unbond. The latter is much more important for security: if a pool's validators
are attacking the network, their members need to unbond fast! Avoiding additional slashes gives them
an incentive to do that if validators get repeatedly slashed.

Commit message:

max active nominator counts swapped and several other minor fixes

docs/learn/learn-nomination-pools.md, after:

---
id: learn-nomination-pools
title: Nomination Pools
sidebar_label: Nomination Pools
description: Learn about Nomination Pools and their features
keyword: [nominate, nominator, stake, staking, pools]
slug: ../learn-nomination-pools
---
import RPC from "./../../components/RPC-Connection"

:::info Nomination Pools are live on [Westend](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Fwestend-rpc.polkadot.io#/staking/pools) and [Kusama](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Fkusama-rpc.polkadot.io#/staking/pools).

Get some [Westies (WND)](learn-DOT.md#getting-westies) and start experimenting with Nomination
pools! Soon they will be deployed on Polkadot.

:::

:::tip Have questions on Nomination Pools?

If you have questions about nomination pools, please join our
[nomination pools support channel](https://matrix.to/#/#nompools-support:matrix.parity.io).

:::

![Nomination Pools](../assets/staking/NPoS-Pools.png)

[Nomination pools](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/10694) are one of the key
(experimental) features from the roadmap of
[Staking improvements](https://gist.github.com/kianenigma/aa835946455b9a3f167821b9d05ba376) on
Polkadot. They are designed to permissionlessly allow members to pool their funds together and act
as a single nominator account. Due to the current runtime constraints, 
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}
can only handle
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.maxElectingVoters" defaultValue={22500}/> :polkadot }}
{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.electionProviderMultiPhase.maxElectingVoters" defaultValue={12500}/> :kusama }}
nominators comfortably in the
[electing set](learn-nominator.md#staking-election-stages). As one of the objectives of the
[NPoS algorithm](learn-phragmen.md) is to maximize the overall stake on the network, it can be
inferred that the staking system on Polkadot favors nominators with a larger stake. Only the
nominator accounts which back the Validators in the active set are eligible for receiving staking
rewards. This leaves out nomination intents from the accounts with lower DOT balance than the
min-active nomination and places them in a waiting queue to enter electing set. Nomination pools
will be handy to the members who would like to participate in the staking system with a stake much
lower than the dynamic min-active nomination threshold on the network. All operations are constant
space and time complexity relative to the number of members, eliminating any theoretical upper bound
on the quantity of members the system can handle and thus scaling the number of accounts that can
participate and earn rewards in the staking system on Polkadot. In summary, each nomination pool is
viewed as a single nominator from the NPoS system point of view.

:::info Why aren't the members in the nomination pools called delegators?

The term `delegator` is associated too much with Delegated Proof of Staking (DPoS) and since
Polkadot implements Nominated Proof of Staking (NPoS), naming them as delegators would be
misleading. `member` is our generic replacement for `delegator`. In action, members are actually
quite similar to delegators and do delegate their nomination power to the pool.

:::

The earnings of the pool are split pro rata to a member's stake in the bonded pool (and thus the
staking rewards for members will be the same as if they were a nominator). Importantly, slashes are
also applied proportionally to members who may have been actively bonded when a validator committed
a slashable offence.

## Key Components of Nomination Pools

- Bonded Pool: Tracks the distribution of actively staked funds.
- Reward Pool: Tracks rewards earned by actively staked funds.
- Unbonding Sub Pools: Collection of pools at different phases (i.e. eras) of the unbonding
  lifecycle.
- Members: Accounts that nominate to the pools.
- Point: A unit of measure for a member’s portion of a pool's funds. All pools start with a point to
  Planck ratio of 1. Over time, if the pool receives rewards, they increase in value, and if the
  pool is slashed, it decreases in value.

## Pool Member Lifecycle

### Join a pool

A member delegates funds to a pool by transferring some amount to the pool’s bonded account with the
`join` extrinsic. The pool then increases its bond with the new funds. A member is afforded the
ability to bond additional funds, or re-stake rewards as long as they are already actively bonded.
Note that a member may only belong to one pool at a time.

:::info

The funds nominated to a pool will not be visible in the member's account balance on Polkadot JS
Apps UI. This is because the member funds are transferred from their account to the pool's account.
This pool account is not accessible by anyone (including the pool root or depositor) and only the
pool's internal logic can access the account.

:::

Navigate to Network > Staking > Pools page on Polkadot JS Apps UI and choose the pool to join. Click
on the Join button and then sign and submit the transaction specifying the amount you would like to
nominate.

![Join Pool](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-3.png)

![Join Pool](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-4.png)

### Claim rewards

The member can claim their portion of any rewards that have accumulated since the previous time they
claimed (or in the case that they have never claimed, any rewards that have accumulated since the
era after they joined). Rewards are split pro rata among the actively bonded members.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled, where you can view your
pooled member account details. To claim rewards, click on the three vertical dots and click on
Withdraw claimable.

![Claim rewards](../assets/staking/nomination-pools-claim.png)

### Unbond funds

At any point in time after joining the pool, a member can start the process of exiting by unbonding.
`unbond` will unbond part or all of the member's funds.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled and click on the three
vertical dots and click on Unbond funds.

### Withdraw unbonded funds

After `unbond` has been called and the unbonding duration has passed (e.g. 28 days on Polkadot), a
member may withdraw their funds with `withdrawUnbonded`. Withdrawing effectively ends a member's
relationship with their pool, allowing them to join a different pool if desired.

On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Accounts > Pooled and click on the three
vertical dots and click on Withdraw unbonded.

### Limitations

- A member cannot vote (e.g. in Referenda or for Council members) with their nominated funds. This
  may be changed in the future once accounts are afforded the ability to split votes.
- In order for a member to switch pools they must wait for the normal 28 day unbonding process.
- A member can partially unbond the staked funds in the pool (at most 16 partial unbonds).

## Pool Administration

### States

- Open: The pool is open to be joined by anyone.
- Blocked: The pool is blocked; no joiners are permitted.
- Destroying: The pool is in the process of being destroyed. Once in this state the pool may never
  revert to any other state; it can only proceed to being destroyed. All members can be
  permissionlessly unbonded; this allows the pool to be dismantled regardless of any individual
  member’s proactivity.

### Roles:

- Depositor: Creates the pool and is the initial member. The depositor can only leave the pool once
  all other members have left. Once they leave by withdrawing, the pool is fully removed from the
  system.
- Nominator: Can select the validators the pool nominates.
- State-Toggler: Can change the pool’s state and kick (permissionlessly unbond/withdraw) members if
  the pool is blocked.
- Root: Can change the nominator, state-toggler, or itself. Further, it can perform any of the
  actions the nominator or state-toggler can.

## Pool Lifecycle

### Creation

The depositor calls the `create` extrinsic, setting the administrative roles and transferring some
funds to the pool in order to add themselves as the first member. As stated above, the depositor
must always be a member as long as the pool exists; they will be the last member to leave, ensuring
they always have some skin in the game. Significant stake from the depositor is always a good
indicator for the pool's credibility. The pool’s ‘nominator role’ selects validators with the
nominate extrinsic. On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to Network > Staking > Pools and click on Add
Pool button.

![Create Nomination Pools](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-1.png)

The UI automatically assigns ID to the pool and allows for entering the name of the pools as well as
the deposit to be bonded.

![Create Nomination Pools - deposit](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-2.png)

When creating a pool using Polkadot JS Apps UI, all the roles are mapped to the Depositor account by
default. If any of these roles need to be assigned to a different account, create the pool using
`create` extrinsic available on Developer > Extrinsics > nominationPools on Polkadot JS Apps UI.

![Nomination Pool Roles](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-7.png)

### Upkeep

The `nominator` can update the pool’s validator selection. On Polkadot JS Apps UI, navigate to
Network > Staking > Accounts page and click on Pooled button.If you have any pooled accounts with
the role of `nominator`, you would notice the option to set nominees. Select the validators to
nominate like you would normally using a nominator account.

![Nominate validators](../assets/staking/Nomination-Pools-5.png)

The `state-toggler` can update the pool’s state to blocked through `setState` extrinsic and then
kick members by calling `unbond` and `withdrawUnbonded`. (The state can also be toggled back to
open).

### Destruction

A pool can be pushed into the “destroying” state via one of:

- The state-toggler sets the pool to “destroying”.
- Any account can set the pool to destroying if over 90% of the pool's active bonded balance has
  been slashed. Dismantling a destroying pool
- When a pool is in ‘destroying’ state, `unbond` and `withdrawUnbonded` become permissionless, so
  anyone can help all the members exit.
- Once the depositor withdraws, no members belong to the pool, and all the pool’s resources are
  wiped from state.

## Slashing

If a pool’s underlying nomination account is slashed by the staking system, then the slash is
distributed evenly across the bonded pool and the unbonding pools from slash era+1 through the slash
apply era. Thus, any member who either a) was unbonding or b) was actively bonded in the
aforementioned range of eras will be affected by the slash. In other words, a member who may have
been actively bonded during the offence is slashed pro rata based on its stake relative to the total
slash amount.

Unbonding pools need to be slashed to ensure all nominators who were in the bonded pool while it was
backing a validator that committed an offence are punished. Without these measures a nominator could
unbond right after a validator equivocated with no consequences.

This strategy is unfair to members who joined after the slash, because they get slashed as well, but
spares members who unbond. The latter is much more important for security: if a pool's validators
are attacking the network, their members need to unbond fast! Avoiding additional slashes gives them
an incentive to do that if validators get repeatedly slashed.
