docs/learn/learn-architecture.md, before:

---
id: learn-architecture
title: Architecture
sidebar_label: Architecture
description: Learn about the key components to Polkadot's Architecture.
slug: ../learn-architecture
---

Polkadot is a heterogeneous multichain with shared security and interoperability.

# Components

## Relay Chain

The Relay Chain is the central chain of Polkadot. All validators of Polkadot are staked on the Relay
Chain in DOT and validate for the Relay Chain. The Relay Chain is composed of a relatively small
number of transaction types that include ways to interact with the governance mechanism, parachain
auctions, and participating in NPoS. The Relay Chain has deliberately minimal functionality - for
instance, smart contracts are not supported. The main responsibility is to coordinate the system as
a whole, including parachains. Other specific work is delegated to the parachains, which have
different implementations and features.

## [Parachain](learn-parachains.md) and [Parathread](learn-parathreads.md) Slots

Polkadot can support a number of execution slots. These slots are like cores on a computer's
processor (a modern laptop's processor may have eight cores, for example). Each one of these cores
can run one process at a time. Polkadot allows these slots using two subscription models: parachains
and parathreads. Parachains have a dedicated slot (core) for their chain and are like a process that
runs constantly. Parathreads share slots amongst a group, and are thus more like processes that need
to be woken up and run less frequently.

Most of the computation that happens across the Polkadot network as a whole will be delegated to
specific parachain or parathread implementations that handle various use cases. Polkadot places no
constraints over what parachains can do besides that they must be able to generate a proof that can
be validated by the validators assigned to the parachain. This proof verifies the state transition
of the parachain. Some parachains may be specific to a particular application, others may focus on
specific features like smart contracts, privacy, or scalability &mdash; still, others might be
experimental architectures that are not necessarily blockchain in nature.

Polkadot provides many ways to secure a slot for a parachain for a particular length of time.
Parathreads are part of a pool that shares slots and must-win auctions for individual blocks.
Parathreads and parachains have the same API; their difference is economic. Parachains will have to
reserve DOT for the duration of their slot lease; parathreads will pay on a per-block basis.
Parathreads can become parachains, and vice-versa.

### [Shared Security](learn-security.md)

Parachains connected to the Polkadot Relay Chain all share in the security of the Relay Chain.
Polkadot has a shared state between the Relay Chain and all of the connected parachains. If the
Relay Chain must revert for any reason, then all of the parachains would also revert. This is to
ensure that the validity of the entire system can persist and no individual part is corruptible.

The shared state ensures that the trust assumptions when using Polkadot parachains are only
those of the Relay Chain validator set and no other. Since the validator set on the Relay Chain is
expected to be secure with a large amount of stake put up to back it, parachains should benefit from
this security.

## Interoperability

### [XCM](learn-crosschain.md)
XCM, short for cross-consensus messaging is a format, and not a protocol. It does not assume anything
about the reciever or senders consensus mechanism, it just cares about the format in which the messages
must be formatted in. This format is the bread and butter of how parachains can communicate with one 
another.

### [Bridges](learn-bridges.md)
A blockchain [bridge](../general/glossary.md#bridge) is a connection that allows for arbitrary data to
transfer from one network to another. These chains are interoperable through the bridge but can
exist as standalone chains with different protocols, rules, and governance models. In Polkadot,
bridges connect to the Relay Chain and are secured through the Polkadot consensus mechanism,
maintained by [collators](#collators).

Polkadot uses bridges to bridge the future of Web 3.0, as bridges are fundamental to Polkadot's
interoperable architecture by acting as a [secure and robust] communication channel for chains in
isolation.

# Main Actors

## Validators

[Validators](../general/glossary.md#validator), if elected to the validator set, produce blocks on the Relay
Chain. They also accept proofs of valid state transition from collators. In return, they will
receive staking rewards.

## Nominators

[Nominators](../general/glossary.md#nominator) bond their stake to particular validators in order to help them
get into the active validator set and thus produce blocks for the chain. In return, nominators are
generally rewarded with a portion of the staking rewards from that validator.

## Collators

[Collators](../general/glossary.md#collator) are full nodes on both a parachain and the Relay Chain. They
collect parachain transactions and produce state transition proofs for the validators on the Relay
Chain. They can also send and receive messages from other parachains using XCMP.

---

## Whiteboard Series

For a video overview of the architecture of Polkadot watch the video below for the whiteboard
interview with W3F researcher Alistair Stewart:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xBfC6uTjvbM" frameBorder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowFullScreen></iframe>

Commit message:

Clarify XCm further, add link to spec and explain difference from XCMP

docs/learn/learn-architecture.md, after:

---
id: learn-architecture
title: Architecture
sidebar_label: Architecture
description: Learn about the key components to Polkadot's Architecture.
slug: ../learn-architecture
---

Polkadot is a heterogeneous multichain with shared security and interoperability.

# Components

## Relay Chain

The Relay Chain is the central chain of Polkadot. All validators of Polkadot are staked on the Relay
Chain in DOT and validate for the Relay Chain. The Relay Chain is composed of a relatively small
number of transaction types that include ways to interact with the governance mechanism, parachain
auctions, and participating in NPoS. The Relay Chain has deliberately minimal functionality - for
instance, smart contracts are not supported. The main responsibility is to coordinate the system as
a whole, including parachains. Other specific work is delegated to the parachains, which have
different implementations and features.

## [Parachain](learn-parachains.md) and [Parathread](learn-parathreads.md) Slots

Polkadot can support a number of execution slots. These slots are like cores on a computer's
processor (a modern laptop's processor may have eight cores, for example). Each one of these cores
can run one process at a time. Polkadot allows these slots using two subscription models: parachains
and parathreads. Parachains have a dedicated slot (core) for their chain and are like a process that
runs constantly. Parathreads share slots amongst a group, and are thus more like processes that need
to be woken up and run less frequently.

Most of the computation that happens across the Polkadot network as a whole will be delegated to
specific parachain or parathread implementations that handle various use cases. Polkadot places no
constraints over what parachains can do besides that they must be able to generate a proof that can
be validated by the validators assigned to the parachain. This proof verifies the state transition
of the parachain. Some parachains may be specific to a particular application, others may focus on
specific features like smart contracts, privacy, or scalability &mdash; still, others might be
experimental architectures that are not necessarily blockchain in nature.

Polkadot provides many ways to secure a slot for a parachain for a particular length of time.
Parathreads are part of a pool that shares slots and must-win auctions for individual blocks.
Parathreads and parachains have the same API; their difference is economic. Parachains will have to
reserve DOT for the duration of their slot lease; parathreads will pay on a per-block basis.
Parathreads can become parachains, and vice-versa.

### [Shared Security](learn-security.md)

Parachains connected to the Polkadot Relay Chain all share in the security of the Relay Chain.
Polkadot has a shared state between the Relay Chain and all of the connected parachains. If the
Relay Chain must revert for any reason, then all of the parachains would also revert. This is to
ensure that the validity of the entire system can persist and no individual part is corruptible.

The shared state ensures that the trust assumptions when using Polkadot parachains are only
those of the Relay Chain validator set and no other. Since the validator set on the Relay Chain is
expected to be secure with a large amount of stake put up to back it, parachains should benefit from
this security.

## Interoperability

### [XCM](learn-crosschain)
XCM, short for cross-consensus message, is a format and not a protocol. The format 
does not assume anything about the receiver or senders consensus mechanism, it only cares about 
the format in which the messages must be structured in. XCM format is how parachains will be able to 
communicate with one another. Different from XCMP which is short for cross-chain messaging protocol,
XCM is what gets delivered, and XCMP is the delivery mechanism. Best way to learn more about XCM by
reading the [specification](https://github.com/paritytech/xcm-format).

### [Bridges](learn-bridges.md)
A blockchain [bridge](../general/glossary.md#bridge) is a connection that allows for arbitrary data to
transfer from one network to another. These chains are interoperable through the bridge but can
exist as standalone chains with different protocols, rules, and governance models. In Polkadot,
bridges connect to the Relay Chain and are secured through the Polkadot consensus mechanism,
maintained by [collators](#collators).

Polkadot uses bridges to bridge the future of Web 3.0, as bridges are fundamental to Polkadot's
interoperable architecture by acting as a [secure and robust] communication channel for chains in
isolation.

# Main Actors

## Validators

[Validators](../general/glossary.md#validator), if elected to the validator set, produce blocks on the Relay
Chain. They also accept proofs of valid state transition from collators. In return, they will
receive staking rewards.

## Nominators

[Nominators](../general/glossary.md#nominator) bond their stake to particular validators in order to help them
get into the active validator set and thus produce blocks for the chain. In return, nominators are
generally rewarded with a portion of the staking rewards from that validator.

## Collators

[Collators](../general/glossary.md#collator) are full nodes on both a parachain and the Relay Chain. They
collect parachain transactions and produce state transition proofs for the validators on the Relay
Chain. They can also send and receive messages from other parachains using XCMP.

---

## Whiteboard Series

For a video overview of the architecture of Polkadot watch the video below for the whiteboard
interview with W3F researcher Alistair Stewart:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xBfC6uTjvbM" frameBorder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowFullScreen></iframe>
