docs/learn/learn-video-tutorials.md, before:

---
id: learn-video-tutorials
title: Video Tutorials
sidebar_label: Video Tutorials
description: Links to useful tutorial videos for Polkadot related topics.
slug: ../learn-video-tutorials
---

## Getting Started

- [Polkadot for Beginners](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kw8eu2VadFA&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGt-V6azbEcVuuIL_MbmgKhy)
- [A Walkthrough of Polkadot's UI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM)
- [Polkadot Webinars](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9B10wX9Mphc&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsLEJq0sRyvUD-pWuVwA5yg)
- [How to protect yourself from scams](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WqDlG4sy_i4)

## Tutorials

### Accounts, Transfers & Staking

- [How to create Polkadot accounts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hhUZ40ZWqkE)
- [Understanding Accounts and Keys](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhfccevPqWI)
- [How to Stake DOT/KSM with Ledger](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VN4S8MofEW8)
- [Why do transfers fail?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wzqi8-WXiK8)
- [Existential Deposit and Keep-Alive Checks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZjKpTgxDp_4)
- [Why should you Nominate on Polkadot and Kusama?](https://youtu.be/weG_uzdSs1E)
- [Picking validators to Nominate (Stake)](https://youtu.be/ZMzhM1m4I-k)

### Governance

- [Voting on Referenda on Polkadot and Kusama](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkbhhlsezGA)
- [Voting for Polkadot and Kusama council](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=837Vv3gdRzI)

### For validators

- [Validator Resources](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsM3O0t5iWgvMkivHnwE1C_)
- [Why should you become a Validator?](https://youtu.be/0EmP0s6JOW4)
- [How to upgrade your node](https://youtu.be/5LtcdBR9F40)
- [Roles and Responsibilities of a Validator](https://youtu.be/riVg_Up_fCg)

### Technical Content

- [Rust, Substrate and Polkadot](https://youtu.be/aVW_eG-IH7o)
- [Introduction to Substrate](https://youtu.be/-6BBIr-DmI4)

## Past and Ongoing Events

- [Encode Polkadot Club 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGvgdDcF-dW4RVEoeFZiZmQc)
- [Polkadot Decoded 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAB8z_PkZD6f-IA6CUONFb)
- [Polkadot Buildathon India 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGtnuyctbnGPPyt6DSSXH1h3)
- [Polkadot Decoded 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGt4LvKE0n66rw_R5c3Qju5f)
- [Hackusama Webinar Series 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsAB7lMLn_Q7c3tbESTzXg7)
- [Web3 Builders Series 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGve_wS2thJp34cWm_SpNNYf)

Commit message:

Updated video links (#2820)
* Updated video links

* auctions and crowdloans

docs/learn/learn-video-tutorials.md, after:

---
id: learn-video-tutorials
title: Video Tutorials
sidebar_label: Video Tutorials
description: Links to useful tutorial videos for Polkadot related topics.
slug: ../learn-video-tutorials
---

## Getting Started

- [Polkadot for Beginners](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kw8eu2VadFA&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGt-V6azbEcVuuIL_MbmgKhy)
- [A Walkthrough of Polkadot's UI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNStMPZjiHM)
- [Polkadot Webinars](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9B10wX9Mphc&list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsLEJq0sRyvUD-pWuVwA5yg)
- [How to protect yourself from scams](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WqDlG4sy_i4)

## Tutorials

### Accounts, Transfers & Staking

- [How to create Polkadot account](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sy7lvAqyzkY)
- [Understanding Accounts and Keys](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhfccevPqWI)
- [How to Stake DOT/KSM on Polkadot JS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCXC0CDhyS4)
- [Using Polkadot with Ledger live](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jL-N_IWiYVA)
- [How to Stake DOT/KSM with Ledger](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VN4S8MofEW8)
- [Why do transfers fail?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wzqi8-WXiK8)
- [Existential Deposit and Keep-Alive Checks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZjKpTgxDp_4)
- [Why should you Nominate on Polkadot and Kusama?](https://youtu.be/weG_uzdSs1E)
- [Picking validators to Nominate (Stake)](https://youtu.be/ZMzhM1m4I-k)

### Parachain Auctions and Crowdloans

- [Contribute to Crowdloans using Polkadot JS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AA9mPANmzmU)
- [Introduction to Parachain Slot auctions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsoxJw0rayk)

### Governance

- [Voting on Referenda on Polkadot and Kusama](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkbhhlsezGA)
- [Voting for Polkadot and Kusama council](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=837Vv3gdRzI)

### For validators

- [Validator Resources](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsM3O0t5iWgvMkivHnwE1C_)
- [Why should you become a Validator?](https://youtu.be/0EmP0s6JOW4)
- [How to upgrade your node](https://youtu.be/5LtcdBR9F40)
- [Roles and Responsibilities of a Validator](https://youtu.be/riVg_Up_fCg)

### Technical Content

- [Rust, Substrate and Polkadot](https://youtu.be/aVW_eG-IH7o)
- [Introduction to Substrate](https://youtu.be/-6BBIr-DmI4)

## Past and Ongoing Events

- [Encode Polkadot Club 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGvgdDcF-dW4RVEoeFZiZmQc)
- [Polkadot Decoded 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGuAB8z_PkZD6f-IA6CUONFb)
- [Polkadot Buildathon India 2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGtnuyctbnGPPyt6DSSXH1h3)
- [Polkadot Decoded 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGt4LvKE0n66rw_R5c3Qju5f)
- [Hackusama Webinar Series 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGsAB7lMLn_Q7c3tbESTzXg7)
- [Web3 Builders Series 2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOyWqupZ-WGve_wS2thJp34cWm_SpNNYf)
