---
id: how-to-dyor
title: How to Identify Legitimate Projects
sidebar_label: How to Identify Legitimate Projects
---

There are many projects that are being built, or intend to build, on both Polkadot and Kusama.
However, there are also many that claim to do so, but actually have either no such intention, they
don't have the resources to pull it through or they're outright trying to scam people by misusing
the Polkadot and Kusama brands.

Telling legitimate projects from the "not so honest" ones isn't always an easy task. This guide is
meant to help you in your own research in identifying whether a project is legitimate. What it's
**not** meant to do, is characterise any single project as legitimate or not, or make that decision
for you. It's simply a list of usual telltale signs of a legitimate project as opposed to one that's
not, to help you make your own decisions.

Finally, a project being legitimate doesn't necessarily mean it will be a successful one too and
this guide is definitely not meant to be viewed as financial or investment advice. Besides doing
your own reserch in the legitimacy of a project, you need to do it for its success prospects too,
before deciding to invest.

### "Powered by Polkadot" clarification

This statement on many projects' sites is often cause of confusion. This usually means that the
project is building, or intends to build, on the Polkadot ecosystem, using Substrate. But any
project can claim that, so the existence of this statement on a project's site infers no information
about the legitimacy of the project and it's certainly not a "seal of approval" by Web3 Foundation.

## Signs of a legitimate project

#### 1. It has received a Web3 Grant

[Web3 Foundation Grants](https://github.com/w3f/Open-Grants-Program) are a way to subsidise projects
that are building on Polkadot. They have very specific criteria in order to apply and are thorougly
reviewed by the review team. So, having their application approved is a first indication that the
team is committed to their project. Once they have delivered their first milestone, they can add the
["Web3 Grants" badge](https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program/blob/master/grants/grant-badge-guidelines.md)
on their project's site.

Having received a grant is a strong indicator that a project is legitimate. And if they have
delivered all of their milestones, then it's most likely of reasonable quality. However, a grant is
not a guarantee on the continuity of the project and it can be terminated at any point if they
violate the rules of the program, so that's something to look out for.

Finally, a grant **is not** an endorsement by or a partnership with Web3 Foundation.

The full list of projects that have successfully applied for a grant can be found
[here](https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program/blob/master/grants/accepted_grant_applications.md),
where you can see what each project has delivered and which ones had their grant terminated.

#### 2. Open source

An open source project promotes transparency, builds trust and ensures the project team isn't doing
something suspicious behind the scenes. Additionally, it makes it very easy to track the progress of
the project and see how active the team is in developing it.

That doesn't mean, though, that any closed source project isn't legitimate or the team behind it has
something to hide. Many teams choose to keep their code private in order to protect their
intellectual property. And several teams that do so have gotten a
[General Grant](https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program), under which their private code is
reviewed by members of the grants review team.

So, a project being closed source isn't necessarily a red flag, but being open source is certainly a
big plus.

#### 3. Active development

If a project team constantly updates their product, this is always a good indication that the
project is legitimate. Regularly releasing new features and upgrades, fixing bugs, updating their
site and notifying the community of these changes, are all good earmarks of a legitimate project.

And, as mentioned above, an open source project has the additional advantage that the development
activity can be easily monitored through its GitHub repo.

#### 4. Whitepaper

The existence of a whitepaper should be considered mandatory for any project that wants to be taken
seriously. However, the whitepaper needs to be more than a few infographics, some bullet points and
tokenomics. A legitimate project, and even more so a serious project, will deeply analyse all
aspects of their project, its use cases, what problems it aims to solve, as well as the technical
aspects of the project.

A well-written, detailed whitepaper that focuses more on the technology and less on tokenomics, is
always a good sign that the project is legitimate. And, of course, this applies to the project as
whole, meaning focusing on the technology and not on token sales, is always a big plus.

#### 5. Visible and reputable team

Legitimate projects usually display their team members prominently on their site, along with their
social media profiles (usually LinkedIn) and GitHub accounts, for development team members. This
gives prospective users and investors the ability to verify the team's credentials, track records
and expertise. Furthermore, having members of the core team engage directly with the community
promotes trust and transparency for the project.

Besides their own community, projects that are serious about building on Polkadot usually engage
with the broader Polkadot community. They are active in the various Polkadot and Kusama channels and
if any of them are [Ambassadors](https://polkadot.network/polkadot-ambassador-program/), that is
always a good sign.

#### 6. Haven't issued a token on another chain

Since Polkadot and Kusama don't support smart contracts yet, it is a common practice for projects to
issue tokens on Ethereum, or other chains, like Binance Smart Chain, as a means to gather funds,
with the promise to migrate to a Polkadot token when that's possible.

However, if a project has not issued tokens on another chain, this shows their dedication to the
ecosystem and their commitment to actually build on Polkadot. They have no failsafe to fall to,
which limits delays and removes the possibility that they may decide to not build on Polkadot after
all, in favor of another blockchain.

There are, however, several projects that advertise a "multi-chain" solution. In these cases it's
natural for the project to issue tokens on multiple chains, but at the same time it increases the
possibility that the project may not build on Polkadot in the end.

#### 7. Parachain candidate

There are many ways a project can build on Polkadot. But the most direct and impactful is by aiming
to be a parachain. And finding whether a project is actually building a parachain is the easiest
one: through the
[Rococo testnet parachains](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/parachains)
and
[parathreads](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/parachains/parathreads)
pages on polkadot.js.org. Every project that aims to be a parachain will test their chain on Rococo
as a parachain and a parathread before moving over to Kusama and eventually Polkadot.

They will also be trying out
[crowdloans](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/parachains/crowdloan)
and
[auctions](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/parachains/auctions)
on the Rococo testnet and they should be active in the
[Rococo channel](https://matrix.to/#/!WuksvCDImqYSxvNmua:matrix.parity.io?via=matrix.parity.io&via=matrix.org&via=web3.foundation).

Of course, getting a parachain slot on either of the two main networks is not guaranteed and the
project will need to win the [auction](learn-auction.md) for the slots they're interested in, or
they may choose to be a [parathread](learn-parathreads.md) instead (although this should be
clarified to their community). But testing their software on the Rococo testnet is certainly a
strong indicator of the legitimacy of the project.

## Signs of an illegitimate project

#### 1. Poor site quality

An easy way to recognise an illegitimate project is by the quality of their site. A poorly
constructed site, with typos and grammatical errors, or poor styling, a site that's a template
without any serious effort to improve or change it, a site that holds little information about the
project, without links to their GitHub or other resources, and generally a site that doesn't feel
professional, are indications that the team is not serious about this project.

However, be careful! Many projects that don't have any plans to build anything substantial, still
have nice, or even beautiful, looking sites. They put a lot of resources on how they present
themselves visually in order to mislead. So, a nice site doesn't necessarily indicate a legitimate
project, a poor site usually indicates an illegitimate one, but you always need to check all the
things listed here before drawing a conclusion.

#### 2. Invisible or fake team

Contrary to a visible and engaged team, if a project mentions the team members but offers no
information about them or no links to social media or GitHub accounts, that's an indication that
there's something fishy going on. Do a Google search for the team members. If it comes up empty, or
the only results are with reference to the project, then it's an indication their team members are
fake. Their photos on their site, if there are any, will also probably be stock photos, or in other
words, also fake. These are usually easily recognisable, but here is a
[guide](https://helpdeskgeek.com/how-to/free-reverse-image-search-tools/) on how to do a reverse
image search, if you want to be thorough.

Of course, a red flag is also if the team members aren't mentioned at all, and can be found only in
their Telegram group under pseudonyms.

#### 3. Don't trust social media engagement

Although having a vibrant community is a good indication of a legitimate project, many fake projects
will use bots to populate their channels to show high member count and engagement. This is
particularly common in Telegram and Discord, although according to Discord terms any bot users need
to be idintified as such, but scammers don't really care about terms and conditions.

So, don't rely just on Telegram or Discord engagement and what people say in these channels. They
could very easily be bot accounts.

#### 4. Public provider emails

If the project's email, or the team members emails, are from Gmail or Yahoo or some other public
email provider, this is an indication the project is not serious, especially if the emails don't
appear to be personal emails or even valid ones. Any team that's even a bit serious about their
project will register emails using their domain.

#### 5. Copied code without attribution

A forked repo is easy to spot since it points to the original repo. A project that uses forked code
and tries to pass it as their own waves a big red flag. In some cases using someone else's code is
okay, but in these cases attribution to the original project is a must for any legitimate project.
And the same is true if only part of the code is copied from another project.

In fact, this is reason for termination of a Web3 grant and has happened in the past.

#### 6. False claims

Many illegitimate projects will try to elevate and bring validity to themselves by claiming all
sorts of things that simply aren't true. And usually that's accomplished by associating themselves
with well-known entities.

If you see that a project has partnered with Web3 Foundation, you can know from the start that this
is a false claim. Web3 Foundation does not endorse, nor partners with any projects in the ecosystem.

For all other claims, you should check their validity. If they claim they have received a grant,
check to see if that's true and that they have not been terminated. If they claim partnerships with
or funding from various companies and VC funds, cross-reference those claims on those companies'
sites. If they prominently display that they've been featured in reputable media, verify that this
is genuine press coverage and not paid press releases.

This last point, probably encompasses all others: Don't trust what is shown on the surface. Dig deep
and **always verify**.

## Crowdloans

With the imminent launch of parachains many projects that aim to become a parachain launch a
crowdloan in order to gather the necessary funds to participate in the parachain auctions. But with
all the buzz around this imminent launch, it's possible that many scams will also surface. So,
crowdloans need their own section in order to make sure that you're participating in a safe way.

First of all, only projects that aim to become a parachain should have a crowdloan. If a project
isn't a parachain candidate, there shouldn't be a crowdloan associated with it.

The surest way to participate in a parachain crowdloan is the native way through the Crowdloan
module on polkadot.js.org, which you can test on the Rococo testnet
[here](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/parachains/crowdloan).
This issues a special transaction that locks your funds until the parachain slot lease period ends.
You can learn more about crowdloans [here](https://kusama.network/auctions) and on our
[wiki](https://guide.kusama.network/docs/mirror-learn-crowdloans).

A legitimate team will never ask you to send them funds in order to participate in a crowdloan. That
being said, some teams have been doing token sales or swaps in an attempt to get a head start in
raising funds for the upcoming auctions, but these are not crowdloans and they imply full trust in
the team. So, if you plan to participate in these token swaps make sure the project is reputable and
that you're getting the correct information through their official site and social media channels.

Similarly, several centralised exchanges are creating ways to participate in crowdloans through
their platforms, but also some wallets are integrating crowdloan functionality to their apps and
more are sure to follow. Any legitimate effort should be using the native crowdloans module in the
background and simply offer a more streamlined experience for the user. Making sure that's the case
is necessary before using these services, but in any case it still involves trusting the exchange or
the service provider.
